 Definitions of Operations -4 STAGE REFINISH- In addition to the base and mid coat applications of a 3-Stage process, the 4-Stage refinish process, depending on paint manufacturer, may possibly require the application of an additional ground coat. Some paint manufacturers may use a tinted clear coat in addition to the final non-tinted clear coat. These additional steps are not included and should be considered when developing an estimate using an on-the-spot evaluation. 25% full refinish time of each panel/part -Adhesion Promoter (per I-car )- Adhesion promoter may not be required for primed parts. Many replacement bumper covers are supplied primed from the maker. A solvent test should be performed to ensure the primer does not dissolve when solvent is applied. An adhesion promoter may be required for parts that are not supplied primed. In addition, adhesion promoter may be required on bare areas of repaired parts. Adhesion promoter should not be applied to adjacent areas where the original coatings are left intact. -Add for Inside- Refinish the backside of panels. Aperture, Fender, Floor, Quarter, Rear body. (half the base refinish time of the panel) -Caulking Materials- Similar to Seam Sealer - Charging Battery / Maintain Battery Voltage - Certain repair situations may require the on-board vehicle battery to be connected to a battery charger/ battery maintainer during repairs. - Example of this situation is during the scanning process. The OEM may state the vehicle must maintain a certain voltage to ensure all modules, computers, and electrical consumer equipment are being scanned at the proper voltage level. Battery charging/ Battery maintenance is NOT INCLUDED in developed labor times and would be an on the spot evaluation. -Clean and Retape (double sided tape)- 10$ and 0.2 body. For parts that are double sided tape and will be reused. Don’t forget Adhesive cleanup also, that’ll be 0.2 body. - Collision Damage Acce weld stud ss - Cut open a panel so you can see additional damage -Color Tint- The paint being mixed and then sprayed out to see if it is the correct color -Corrosion Protection Rust Proof- Another coating before the base coat/clear coat stage only when a panel is repaired. Replace it does not need. *Etched primer? -Abrasion Corrosion – rubbing or hitting of one material by another -Corrosion Protection – material applied to deter corrosion (oxidation) -Crevice Corrosion – oxidation when two metals are joined -Electrolytic Corrosion – electrical action taking place between two materials in the presence of an electrolyte (liquid) -Fogging – applying material in a mist form -Fretting – deterioration of metal at contact surfaces due to motion and corrosive elements -Galvanic Corrosion – electrical action (electrolysis) between two dissimilar metals in the presence of electrolyte (liquid) -Hot Spot – an unprotected area subject to corrosion -Pitting Corrosion – corrosion on a surface that results in small “specs” or “pinholes” -Stress of Fatigue, Cracking Corrosion – cracking due to stress and atmospheric elements -Desired Characteristics of Corrosion Protection Material 1) Corrosion Prevention Material – the material must displace water to prevent corrosion. This can be tested by spraying water on an open panel on the floor, then spraying the corrosion preventative material over the watered panel and observing if the material displaces the water 2) Creepage of Material – to insure thorough and complete protection coverage, the material should have a “creep” capability, approximately ¼ inch per minute while drying. This assures protective penetration of pinch welds, cracks, etc. 3) Safe Material – material should be non-combustible when dried and when wet unable to support a fire after ignition 4) Clean Up – the material should be of a viscosity which inhibits runs or drips. Overspray on a vehicle’s painted surface should wipe off easily without solvent when wet, with solvent when dry. The materials should also dry clean off clothing 5) Guarantee/Warranty – the corrosion protection has to be done to maintain factory corrosion warranty. Manufacturer’s recommendations must be followed -Flex Additive (Clear Coat)- $15T for plastic paintable items that need to flex such as Bumpers -Flex Mixing Time- 0.3 Refinish, time to make the Flex Additive (Clear Coat) -Mask Jams- Prevents overspray. Different from Cover Car for Overspray. (0.4 refinish smaller parts such as Fender, A-pillar, 0.5 refinish for larger parts such as Liftgate, Quarter, Door, Hood) -Matrix Wand – definitions Sway Straightening Width – sway is a term commonly used to identify a part or area that has been pushed to one side by collision forces, causing a width alignment. Sway may be corrected by making a forward pull that is slightly slanted toward the direction of impact. Placing a block near bends in a part helps straighten the part and keeps it from hinging further back in the vehicle, creating additional damage. If there is a buckle or deformation in one side of the rail, pull on that side of the rail, as it will likely be short and this may help remove the damage Sag Straightening Height – correcting height misalignment commonly involves pulling the part forward in addition to upward or downward. This is because there is often some degree of mash from the collision forces. The forward pull also helps prevent buckling the part during the pull. Straightening height may also require holding adjacent areas. Blocking may be used during a downward pull to prevent adjacent areas from being moved out of specification. Sag is a term commonly used to identify a part or area that is too low Mash Straightening Length – a change in length, also called mash, collapse or short rail, is a condition where any section of a part is shorter than factory specification. Mash may be corrected by pulling the part in the opposite direction of the impact. Some mash damage may be repairable, however, depending on the extent of the damage, partial or complete replacement of the part may be necessary -Prime &amp; Block – prime &amp; block (high build/primer-filler) is a required procedure that restores a repaired panel surface, including the joined areas of replaced welded panels, from 150-grit finish to new undamaged condition. -Sealers and Sound Deadeners – -Terminology -Full Cure Time – time when a sealer has reached full strength -Handling Time – the time when a part can be safely transporter and sealer can no longer be tooled or repositioned -Paintable Time – established time when refinish materials can safely be applied to a sealer -Set Time – time when there is no longer product transfer -Work Time – the length of time a sealer can continue to be applied or tooled effectively -Sealers -Brushable - single component sealer applied with a brush -Flowable – sealer with low viscosity and self-leveling characteristics -Pumpable – a two component or one component sealer that seals interior and exterior joints and voids -Resistance Weld-Through – sealer/adhesive that can be used in conjunction with resistance spot welding -Sealer Tape – preformed sealer -Sprayable – sealer applied with a pneumatic dispenser to duplicate original textured appearance -Thumb Grade – heavy bodied sealer for sealing large gaps and filling voids. Should remain soft and pliable -Sound Deadeners -Mastic Pads – sound deadener pad that is preformed to fit a specific area -Non-Structural Flexible Acoustical – flexible foam with sealing and sound deadening properties -Non-Structural Ridged Acoustical – ridged foam with sealing and sound deadening properties -Identifying Sealers – several types of sealers and sound deadeners are used during assembly. Therefore, specific applications may not be identified in this publication. General applications and the various types of products for repair will be featured to identify and replace OEM sealers and sound deadeners. -Helpful Sealer Tips -Check self-life or expiration date prior to beginning sealer applications -Be sure “work time” is appropriate for sealer application -Temperature, humidity and thickness of sealer will affect the work, set and paintable times -Test fit replacement panels prior to installation to be certain of a tight fit and proper seal -Equalize 2K productions according to adhesive manufacturer’s recommendations -Always follow manufacturer’s recommendations for storage, usage and application to achieve bet performance of the product -Seam Sealer- For new panels and welded on panels. Seam sealer goes around the edges/gaps -Types and Use of Sealer - sealers can be categorized according to their ingredients, applications, hardening types, functions or effectiveness. There are three kinds of sealers (adhesive) used for car manufacturing. One type is a structural use, used for adhering structural components together that need a strong adhesion. The second type is a non-structural use, used for adhering interior upholsteries, and the third type is a quasi-structural use, used to fill-in clearances between the body component parts. For quasi-structural use sealer, there is a mastic sealer that is used for improving panel rigidity, preventing vibration and noise, and a body sealer that is effective for preventing entry of water, dust and wind. -Body Sealer (Paint Sealer) – applied to part contact surfaces to prevent entry of water and dust. It also has a rust-prevention effect for the edges of steel sheets and is used to improve exterior appearances -Foam Filler Material – significantly reduces the amount of passenger compartment road noise when applied to close off body cavities -Glass Sealer (Urethane-based Sealer) – for glasses and other external parts (including the side protector, a urethane-based sealer that is hardened at room temperature is used. The automobile window glasses are attached with a method called direct glazing, which directly adheres laminated glasses onto the painted body. In this method, one-component moisture-curing polyurethane type adhesive is used. The adhesion surfaces are a ceramic coated glass and painted steel panel. To improve the adhesion, primer is applied on both surfaces -Mastic Sealer – used to adhere the hood, trunk, door and roof with outer panels. It not only joins them together but also contributes to increased rigidity of the panels, helping to prevent vibration and noise from the outer panels -Separator – separators are installed in between the panels of mass produced vehicles. Foam is generated around the separators by heat during paint baking process fill up body cavities. Some newer models use expandable foam applied through the inner panel holes for this same purpose -Spot Sealer (aka Weld-Through Primer) – used to prevent rust on the mating surfaces of spot welds -Undercoat- Paintable product which is different from Gravel Guard. Most cars have this, this is usually with a car whose rocker molding is touching the quarter panel. This is sprayed and then gets painted over. Blend Time Study SCRS Blend Study Report: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS BETWEEN FULL REFINISH AND BLEND OPERATIONS www.scrs.com info@scrs.com 877.841.0660 Audatex, CCC/MOTOR and Mitchell each identify a unique refinish time for individual parts within their estimating systems. Each IP also provides a formula to calculate time to blend adjacent panels as 50% of the blend panels base refinish time, when using a two stage refinish. CCC/MOTOR and Mitchell both specify a calculation of 70% of the blend panels base refinish time, when utilizing a three-stage color. Audatex adds 35% to each panel for three-stage, but utilizes the same 50% formula. The conclusions of this study indicated that blending, on average, took 31.59% more time than full refinish, rather than 50% less. -Example – Tesla Model Y Hood refinish is 2.8, blend is 1.4. Take 1.4 x .82 = 2.5. Change the blend time and put “Blend Time Study”. No clear coat Tips on being Efficient Work Smart Time management is key in this business. Here are ways you can be more efficient and really streamline the process Write everything down and document it with photographs Create an R Drive or Shared Location and be organized Save your OEM position statements to an R Drive or Shared Location for quick reference and usage -Answers – get all your answers while you have the vehicle in-front of you in whatever stage the vehicle is in and your estimate / blueprint is in . Keep chipping away as much as you can. -Accident – - How did the accident occur? -How many people were in the vehicle? -What is related and what is not related? -Check for ADAS on vehicle, does it have the following: -Blind Spot Radar -Front Radar -Surround View Camera -Windshield Camera -Etc -Do you have New parts already and can do a trial fit on the parts to ensure multiple things -1) The mounting points on the vehicle are in tolerance -If not, does it require alignment or replacement? -2) The New part is not defective -Inspect the damage, good rule of thumb is to compare the opposite/undamaged side to the damaged side. Most vehicles are symmetrical - Measurement - w as the vehicle measured in one way or another -Digital Angle guide -Frame measurement -Gap dimensions -Pre wheel alignment -Determine if suspension parts are needed or one time use hardware is needed for adjustment. Also do the wheel alignment at this time to ensure it can be adjusted into spec or not. -Tram Gauge measurement -Etc -Paint – did you or a painter check the color – to know if you have to blend, refinish, etc -Photos – did you capture all photos of the vehicle, did you review with a technician and do a walk around -Damaged parts – take a photo of the part number on it as well -R&amp;I parts -Vehicle and its condition -Etc -Updating the vehicle owner, get all your answers before you give them a call. -Get an ETA on the parts -Status update with insurance, it was submitted, they came out, etc - Pressure - If removing a part from the vehicle such as an impact bar and you notice there was pressure upon release, there may be more damage to that vehicle that you may not see. Inertia travels. Check online for that year make and model vehicles inertia travel diagram to get a better feel for where the damage could have traveled -Upsell Opportunities - Check with the vehicle owner and see if they are interested in anything additional to be done to their vehicle. They may want new tires, they may want that dent repaired, they may want ceramic coat. -Bookmark – the websites you need on a daily basis -Create a Check List - this will help ensure you have captured each part of the repair plan. I use a check list every day and it consists of multiple stages of the repair to help ensure I have captured all sectors of the estimate / blueprint. Examples are as follows: -Was the vehicle scanned? Was the scan report reviewed? Were DTC procedures researched -Does the vehicle require ADAS Calibrations? Do you have all ADAS Calibration Procedures? -Was the Paint Code documented? -Is the vehicle repair requiring any specific material? Do you have OEM documentation to back that up? Did you create the invoice relating to the material? -These are some of the things I have on my own checklist and by the time I am done with my blueprint, it is nearly filled out completely. And I say nearly because not every repair will require every category on my checklist. -Clear Mind – personally I prefer being one of the first to arrive at the shop. This gives me plenty of time to work on the estimates / blueprints before the staff arrives, before the noise begins, before the emails and phone calls come through, before the insurance adjuster comes in, before the customers come in. Less traffic early in the morning also. I prefer early morning than late afternoon. -Consistent -be consistent across all estimates / blueprints, this means good organization, easy to follow line operations , consistent labor units. What you do not want is an estimate that is scattered and you are having to scroll up and down to follow along. -Dealer -when working with a dealer on getting / finding correct parts and sending photos of the part over, label the part with part number. This makes it easier for the dealer to find the correct part -Diagrams – print part diagrams from your Estimating Database for writing Estimate / Blueprint, its an easy to follow process for you and your technician. -Filter RT / LT Parts – in your estimating database, to ensure accuracy and efficiency, filter your options to the side you are working on. -Line Notes - if you are adding a specific operation to your estimate such as part needs Loctite 242, put in the line note the procedure name for why. Do not list specifically why it has to be done, list the procedure in the line note. Example: -See Procedure: Front Bumper Removal and Installation -Longevity - is key in this industry. This industry will age you fast. Here some ways to protect yourself -Disassembly Table - use a table to document parts on instead of bending down and working on the ground -Floor Mat - use a cushioned floor mat to stand on to protect your joints -Totes or Parts Carts - Store damaged parts or R&amp;I parts as you go through them -Mobile Work Station - utilize a work station that can be wheeled over to a vehicle, having your work station mobile allows you to hold all the necessary things you need to write an estimate / blueprint -Camera phone -Computer -Dent board -Markers -Notepad -Pens -Pointer stick - for photo usage to show in images - blend, repair, replace, refinish, etc -Printer -Multiple Monitors – allows you to run multiple applications at the same time -Email -Estimating database -Images -Ultimate Guide to Estimating / Blueprinting -Procedures -Part Code Table - add operations to your part code table or copy and paste the line operations in vs typing it all out. -Parts Ordering – use a parts ordering system to quicken your time of ordering -Process of Elimination – older files take priority over newer files. Get as much done as you can on one file before you move on to the next. All procedures, part prices / part numbers, Invoices, Scans, Calibrations, etc. regardless if the vehicle is completely done in the estimate / blueprint phase. Say you are waiting on a measurement and your tech is out, you can still complete everything else on that estimate / blueprint. -40/60/80 % -Operations - list the operations for a part directly underneath it for an itemized breakdown . Example -R&amp;I / R&amp;R - Bumper -DE-NIB - Bumper -Buff - Bumper -Order – Create an order that works for you, such as work front to back or back to the front and while working on the parts in the estimating system, go through each part and the corresponding image. It is the same for researching OEM Repair Procedures. -Standard Operating Procedures – for your team, for yourself, for your estimates / blue prints, what are processes you should follow -Two Step Verification – have two means of documenting a repair. For me, it is documenting the repair via notepad and also taking photographs of the vehicle. Before I complete any estimate or blueprint, I go through my notes on the vehicle and then go through my photos. At times I will notice that I may have not written something down but I did photograph it (or vice versa). This helps ensure accuracy. Descriptions and Explanations -ADAS Diagnostic Report- ADAS PRECAUTIONS G33 ADAS PRECAUTIONS On vehicles that use advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS), OEM repair information must be consulted to ensure repairs will not negatively impact ADAS functionality. -Battery Support - Required to maintain constant voltage during scan process. Per Motors GTE G9: Many OEMs recommend a pre- and post-repair diagnostic scan on all vehicles involved in a collision that could reveal pre-accident or accident-related damage. Please refer to OEM position statement and repair procedures for more information. Due to the variety of scan tools used, both OEM and aftermarket, as well as the variation from vehicle to vehicle and repair to repair, MOTOR is unable to develop a time that accounts for these different scenarios. Therefore, MOTOR recommends an on-the-spot evaluation to determine an appropriate estimated time to perform diagnostic scans for each repair. -Bring Vehicle to Operating Temperatures – NOTE? -Charge and Maintain Battery – Charge and maintain battery during the repair and calibration process - Check and Adjust Tire Pressure – - Need to adjust tire pressures so that the tires travel at the same speed -To aim lamps -Clean for Delivery – Found on P-page G9. SPECIAL NOTATION: The items listed below apply to all labor procedures. If an estimated work time is not available for the items below, an on-the-spot evaluation is recommended to determine an appropriate estimated time. Clean up or detailing of vehicle prior to delivery. -Color Tint- Found on P-page G33. Refinish times do not include time which may be required to match color tints or defective finish textures on interior or exterior surfaces. -Corrosion Protection- Found On P-page G6-G9-G34 Corrosion Protection: A vehicle's ability to resist corrosion may be reduced if improper repairs are made and the manufacturer's corrosion protection is not restored. This may lead to future safety and/or resale value problems. DOES NOT INCLUDE: Anti-corrosion material application SPECIAL NOTATION: The items listed below apply to all labor procedures. If an estimated work time is not available for the items below, an on-the-spot evaluation is recommended to determine an appropriate estimated time. Anticorrosion material restoration/application -Cover and Protect Electrical Connections – Protect electrical connections from contaminant, debris &amp; moisture. Sealing open electrical plugs. When a plug/wire/connector or computer module is left open to the environment, especially in adverse weather…it can potentially allow moisture and debris into electrical system and can cause issues with vehicle. These issues may not show right away, the vehicle may take some time to recognize there is an issue in system -Cover Interior &amp; protection during repairs process. - Protection during repairs, cutting, welding, bonding, riveting, dust, dirt etc. protection during repair process. -D E-NIB - Found on P-page G38 SPECIAL NOTATION: Refinished panels may or may not require a varying amount of de-nibbing, a process used to remove small particles in final finish surface. Each panel requiring de-nibbing (refinish or blend) HOOD, ROOF, TRUNK LID, SPOILER First panel add up to 20% of full base refinish time, each additional panel add up to 10% FENDER, DOOR, QUARTER PANEL, BUMPER COVER First panel add up to 10% of full base refinish time, each additional panel add up to 5% - Drive Cycle Operational Verification - Non included operation, per CCC/Motor Guide Page G9 - Test drive vehicle prior to disassembly due to vehicle collision and being immediately towed. Vehicle needs to have a drive cycle performed to have DTC’s occur prior to final road test after repairs have been complete. -Dynamic Systems Verification – Found on P-page G11 G14 G16 G17 Test Drive to confirm all operations are functioning properly. DOES NOT INCLUDE: G11 Adjusting tire pressure Checking levelness of the ground Creating targets Filling the gas tank R&amp;I of parts for alignment Removing/replacing customer valuables from vehicle Repair of any mounting surfaces Road test dynamic aiming Road test vehicle G14 Road test vehicle G16 Road test vehicle G17 -Electronic Reset – Non included operation, per Motors GTE G9: LABOR TIME DOES NOT INCLUDE: SPECIAL NOTATION: The items listed below apply to all labor procedures. • Reset electronic memory functions after battery disconnect -Feather Edge &amp; Block Sand – Found on P-page G34-G35-G38 Prime &amp; block (high build/primer-filler) is a required procedure that restores a repaired panel surface, including the joined areas of replaced welded panels, from 150-grit finish to NEW UNDAMAGED condition. It is MOTOR’s position that prime and block is a refinishing process best reserved for the judgment of an estimator/appraiser following a thorough on-the-spot evaluation of the specific vehicle and damage in question. DOES NOT INCLUDE: Anti-corrosion material application, Filling, blocking, featheredging repaired panels. Prime &amp; block (high build/primer-filler -Flex Mixing Time – Found on P-page G34. DOES NOT INCLUDE: Anti-corrosion material application Filling, blocking, feather edging repaired panels. Flex additive mixing time Flex prep application Material costs -Glass Cleaner- Any unclear glass, sensors, cameras, etc. can throw off calibrations by up to 1.5 degrees. -Mask and Protect Removed Components – Wrap, store items removed &amp; protect from collateral damage, during the course of repairs. -Mask for Buffing – Protection during de-nib, wet/dry sand and compound, protection from residue in jambs &amp; moldings etc. -Mobile Kart for EV- Mobile kart for EV platform is designed for high voltage safety as a top priority. A high voltage safety system is a set of measures and components designed to protect people and equipment from dangers associated with high voltage electrical systems. To ensure handling safely, proper precautions are taken for systems to be handled safely. Ensuring proper precautions are taken on high voltage vehicles, protecting both vehicle and people from harm. Personal protective equipment (PPE) such as high voltage gloves, protective coated tools, barriers, safety hook, EV fire blankets, class D fire extinguisher, dedicated voltage meter, eye protection, isolated caps to prevent people from encountering high voltage electrocution. In compliance with EV manufacturers. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and Emergency Equipment for particular hazards and applications. Selection and application of PPE always depends on an adequate pre-task risk assessment and must be in compliance with local regulations, norms, and standards. For safe and effective us, PPE must be: Suitable for the purpose for which they are used. Used properly in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Well maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions Safely stored in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. -OEM Research – Found on P-page G6. OEM COMPONENT REPLACEMENT - GENERAL The collision repair facility must have the equipment, training, and experience using the latest factory/industry information and procedures. Ultimately, the safety and quality of any repair will depend not only on the equipment that is used and the procedure that is followed, but also on the skill and knowledge of the repair technicians, the steps they take to control repair quality and how well they check the details of the repair. Some repair operations reported in this guide may be beyond the capability of the repair shop in terms of equipment, skill and knowledge, etc. In this case the repair shop should not attempt the repair. Extreme care and caution should always be used when performing collision repairs on any vehicle. All repairs must be of the highest quality using the latest factory recommended repair procedures with the following concerns kept in mind. Vehicle can not be repaired properly without OEM procedures or research; this is a non-included operation &amp; a on the spot evaluation. -Parts Disposal Fee- Found on P-page G9 G34. ESTIMATED WORK TIME DOES NOT INCLUDE: SPECIAL NOTATION: The items listed below apply to all labor procedures. If an estimated work time is not available for the items below, an on-the-spot evaluation is recommended to determine an appropriate estimated time Waste disposal fees (all types) -Refinish Material Invoice- Found on P-page G9 G34 G35 G36 G37 ESTIMATED WORK TIME DOES NOT INCLUDE: SPECIAL NOTATION: The items listed below apply to all labor procedures. If an estimated work time is not available for the items below, an on-the-spot evaluation is recommended to determine an appropriate estimated time. Material costs G9 G34 Paint or material costs G35 G36 G37 -Scans -Pre-Scan – Before disassembly -In-Process Scan – After reassembly but before calibrations -Post-Scan – After calibrations and test drive to verify all codes have been addressed and haven’t returned -Spray Out Cards – Found on P-page G35 G36 SPECIAL NOTATION: The following items or operations were not considered during. the development of any published basic refinish operation times. If any of these items or operations are required, they should be considered by the estimator. DOES NOT INCLUDE: Test spray-out panel -Stage and Secure for Refinish – As per DEG inquiry this is a non-included operation - Steering Angle Sensor recalibration- Found on P-page G9 ESTIMATED WORK TIME DOES NOT INCLUDE: SPECIAL NOTATION: The items listed below apply to all labor procedures. If an estimated work time is not available for the items below, an on-the-spot evaluation is recommended to determine an appropriate estimated time Steering Angle Sensor recalibration - Test Battery Condition – Low battery voltage and/or repair procedures may inadvertently set multiple DTCs. Clear DTCs, and determine which ones reset after battery voltage is stabilized -Trial-Fit- Found on P-page G9 ESTIMATED WORK TIME DOES NOT INCLUDE: SPECIAL NOTATION: The items listed below apply to all labor procedures. If an estimated work time is not available for the items below, an on-the-spot evaluation is recommended to determine an appropriate estimated time. Trial-Fit of a component to verify dimensional accuracy of adjoining parts. -Wash and Tack after Blocking – Per Motors GTE page G35: Only one solvent wash is included in the basic clear coat application. Refinish times are based on new undamaged panels therefore any additional washes required during the repair of the panel is non-included in any labor time -Wash and Tack after Repairs – Per Motors GTE page G35: Only one solvent wash is included in the basic clear coat application. Refinish times are based on new undamaged panels therefore any additional washes required during the repair of the panel is non-included in any labor time. - Waste disposal fees (all types)- Found on P-page G9 G34 ESTIMATED WORK TIME DOES NOT INCLUDE: G9 SPECIAL NOTATION: The items listed below apply to all labor procedures. If an estimated work time is not available for the items below, an on-the-spot evaluation is recommended to determine an appropriate estimated time. Access to repair information/subscription cost -Wet/Dry Sand, Rub-out &amp; Buff Found on P-page G39 WET/DRY SAND, RUB-OUT &amp; BUFF SPECIAL NOTATION: Refinished panels may or may not require a varying amount of wet sanding, compound rub-out or buffing operations in order to match original finish texture Each panel requiring wet sand, rub-out and/or buff (refinish or blend) – Add 30% of full base refinish time Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) Operation Category – is what should be on every repair plan, I say should as this is for your average vehicle repair. An average vehicle repair would be a vehicle that requires calibrations, paint work, part replacement, etc. Operations from each department essentially. -ADAS Diagnostic Report - $25.00 -Automatic Emergency Braking Calibration– as of September 2022 – all vehicles will have emergency braking and will require calibration -Battery Support – 0.2 mechanical -Check and Adjust Tire Pressure – 0.2 mechanical -add to estimate when there is not a wheel alignment on an estimate. Please add one or two of the following lines below to the line note in the estimate: - Need to adjust tire pressures so that the tires travel at the same speed -To aim lamps -Clean for Delivery - -1.0 body - standard vehicle -2.0 large vehicle - such as a UPS truck or Amazon truck -Any spills occurred in the vehicle during the accident? Such as spilt coffee -Bio hazard cleanup - such as vomit or other bodily fluids -Deer remains -$20 -Plymouth Rock &amp; High Point -State Farm doesn’t pay for this, build it into the estimate -Clear Codes- __ x 0.1 = __ mechanical = -Color Tint – 0.5 refinish -Three Stage -1.0 refinish -Four Stage -1.5 refinish -note – example Tesla White PPSW “On paint computer: Solution 5 Step 1/3 – ground coat Step 2/3 – base coat Step 3/3 – pearl coat Clear coat - not included with steps 1-2-3 and is an additional step -Color Check – 0.3 refinish - Paint code has color chips. Labor unit is to locate color chip and check color for match -Cover Car – See Cover Car Operation Category -DE-NIB -Removing dirt nibs from paint -20% for panel facing the sky – Hood, Liftgate, Roof – one time 20% -10% for first panel -5% for additional panels -Disconnect and Reconnect Battery – 0.4 mechanical -Diesel / Dually / Dual Battery – 0.8 mechanical -Rivian – immediately tenderize the batteries upon removal/disconnection until we get RIDE otherwise they will need replace. Tenderize batteries entire time you are working on them -Only reconnect the batteries if you are moving the vehicle, otherwise keep them disconnected -Dynamic System Verification – 1.0 mechanical -Consists of a Road Test and confirmation of ADAS features working properly -Electronic Reset – 0.5 mechanical -Resetting vehicle settings -Restoring customer Bluetooth connection -Restoring customer settings -EV’s – Restarting and Updating Vehicle (Vehicle cannot be driven during this time) -Glass Cleaner - $2.00 -Hazardous Waste Removal –$7.50 -Amica - $5.00 -HP/Plymouth Rock - $3.00 -Measurement – Every vehicle should be measured in some form -All Audi’s require measurement post collision -Car-O-Liner / Frame Measurement -Gap Dimensions -Suspension Pre Wheel Alignment -Tram Gauge -Miscellaneous Hardware- $10.00 - $25.00 -Mobile cart for EV -$25.00 and 0.3 body – DPR -$50.00 and 0.5 body – Non-DRP -OEM Research - $$ and mechanical labor unit -Not DRP’s - Plymouth Rock/HP, Not Amica - http://webserver.rilegislature.gov/BillText/BillText23/SenateText23/S0925A.pdf -Parts Disposal Fee - -$5.00 Plymouth Rock / High Point -$10-$25 all other insurance companies -Perform a Drive Cycle Operational Verification – 0.7 M - -Sometimes when cars are in accidents, they immediately get towed and a drive cycle isn’t done to have any error codes pop up which then is an issue because error codes may be present at the time of the final test drive / road test. -Pre, In-process, Post Scan vehicle - Plymouth Rock &amp; High Point $125 each/3x. All other insurance companies $150 each. (mechanical $ amount) -Rivian -Pre-Scan 1.0 mechanical -In-Process Scan 1.0 mechanical – In-Process scan is required for all operations that require RiDE -Post-Scan 1.0 mechanical -Tesla - Trim to access scanner – 0.3 body unit -Tesla Toolbox Scan – 1-hour mechanical. – -Tesla Toolbox Software Script Programming – every error code is a 0.1 mechanical = 44 error codes = 4.4 mechanical + calibrations -Pre-wash and degrease-$10.00 and 0.5 body -Clean road salt -Need a clean surface to inspect / work on -prior to body work, disassembly, repairs, welding, etc -Provide support assist functions for resets – 0.5 mechanical -Refinish Material Invoice – -Relocate 2 notes below for your own notes? -Non-DRP – grand total minus materials (CCC)= Refinish material invoice price -DRP-Paint subtotal minus materials(CCC) or Taxable Paint Materials (Mitchell) = Refinish material invoice price - Safety Inspections / Repairs and Inspections required after a collision – refer to OEM Procedure -2027 New seatbelt for rear -Service Mode – 0.1 mechanical -Tesla -&gt; hold the button -Toyota - ???? -Rivian -&gt; where to find it in Rivian is Ride -&gt; Diagnostic -&gt; Service Repair Routine -&gt; search service mode * also in the radio screen -Rivian Gear Guard (Security camera system) – only tells the owner on their app if vehicle is recording, they do not have footage to their phone. What the owner does have access to is locking and unlocking, lowering windows, AC, seeing if something is open or unlocked (hood open) -Setup Scan Tool - 0.2 mechanical -Spray Out Card – 0.5/1.0/1.5 refinish (see paint Operation category Or if color chip exists – Color Check – 0.3 refinish -Static Gun – $14.00 and 0.1 -0.1 per part - Used to remove static from parts prior to painting -Storage Charges – include storage charge in estimate at the bottom of date sent and date storage kicks in. -Write in the document the day you send it and the day it starts -11/1/2021-11/4/2021 -Storage Charges are for storing a vehicle safely, Due to cars sitting for too long, having an excess number of vehicles at the shop, for storing . Need to keep vehicles safe. -Touch up painted bolts – 0.3 (Plymouth Rock/High Point) -0.5 refinish (all other insurance) -Transfer hardware– 0.2 +- body -Access hole – to transfer hardware did you have to cut out a portion of the part to gain access to the hardware to remove it? -Add saw blade / cutting wheel or other material used and labor unit - From damage to new part -One time use hardware on body/susp/part or panel, etc - Wet/Dry Sand, Rub-out &amp; Buff AC and Cooling Operation Category -A/C Leak Check-0.2 mechanical -A/C System Dye/Electronic test - $10 and 0.5 mechanical -A/C reset 0.3 mechanical -Bring vehicle to operating temperatures – 0.2 Mechanical - Required to allow system functions to initialize prior to resets. Systems include cooling, emission and motors -Does not apply to EV vehicles as they are always at operating temperature -Clamps -Are the clamps one time use or reusable? -Clamp Cooling Hoses-0.2 -To prevent hoses from draining while moving around the facility, to prevent any contaminants/dust/dirt etc from getting in -Climate Control System Check -0.3 mechanical -Check all air conditioning temperatures, features, systems, performance -Coolant -Tesla G48 coolant – from Zep Sales &amp; Service. - email – customer_service@zep.com -Beck/Arnley – Genuine foreign nameplate parts. Premium Antifreeze/Coolant. Euro concentrate - -Cooling Fan Operation Check – 0.1 mechanical - As per DEG inquiry this is a non-included operation - Cover and Protect AC lines – $3.00 and 0.2 body -Protects AC lines from moisture in the air, contaminants, dust, etc -Fluid Drain, Fill and Purge coolant – 1.0 mechanical -Maintenance reminder reset - ?? -Flush condenser/radiator lines - ___ -O-rings – need to be replaced? -Replace o-rings – 0.1 m - As per DEG inquiry this is a non-included operation -Refrigerant and Refrigerant Oil- -Note on the estimate the correct amount required, example below – -R1234 (2.10 lbs / 0.952544 kgs) -R1234 and Refrigerant Oil - $485 -R134 and Refrigerant Oil - $85 -R-744 and Refrigerant Oil -2023 Audi Q4 E-Tron -Refrigerant Leak Test – 0.5 Mechanical -Straightening the fins of the Condenser/Radiator - ___ different for every vehicle -Trans fluid - ADAS History The current history of ADAS over the years -1950-2000 – Safety and Convenience -2000-Present – ADAS -2016-2025-Partially Autonomous -2025+ - Autonomous ADAS Operation Category As vehicles become more and more advanced it is important to look through OEM procedures and recommendations. ADAS not only involves driver assistance, it also helps deploy airbags https://app.revvadas.com/reports/new https://1sourceadas.b2clogin.com/1sourceadas.onmicrosoft.com/b2c_1_signupsignin_1_prod/oauth2/v2.0/authorize?client_id=83f3904e-5a2b-4e09-bd3d-799b4421a4cd&amp;scope=openid%20profile%20offline_access&amp;redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fportal.1sourceadas.com%2Fauth&amp;client-request-id=463bc1fa-97a7-4715-95d1-4991c6008ad6&amp;response_mode=fragment&amp;response_type=code&amp;x-client-SKU=msal.js.browser&amp;x-client-VER=3.2.0&amp;client_info=1&amp;code_challenge=gGA1Le3i-AtlFPcwOq7_Qarqjez1ez9JOfq0VGSoHh0&amp;code_challenge_method=S256&amp;nonce=aa05ea84-d642-42f5-81bc-c1c40eae2480&amp;state=eyJpZCI6IjBmYjlkNDc2LWRiMmMtNGI0Yy05YzIwLWU3YzFjN2VlYmFhZiIsIm1ldGEiOnsiaW50ZXJhY3Rpb25UeXBlIjoicmVkaXJlY3QifX0%3D - ADAS Diagnostic Report - $25 -Additional Calibrations such as what is listed below: 1.0 mechanical -Eyesight -Occupant Sensor -Power Door Unlock -Power Windows -Seatbelts -TPMS -Blind Spot – Check BSI Installation Angle – 0.2 body -Bumper or a part- does the bumper or a part have to be removed for front radar or blind spot radar calibration? Add line for R&amp;I -Charge and Maintain Battery during ADAS Calibrations - -DRP - $10.00 and 0.3 mechanical - Non-DRP - $25.00 and 0.6 mechanical -Check Radar Angle – 0.2 mechanical -Dynamic Calibrations via Radar, Module, Camera – 1.0 mechanical - Dynamic – is a mobile calibration while vehicle is in motion -Headlamps and Taillamps – -Some headlights need to be programmed / coded to the vehicle -Some taillamps need to be programmed / coded to the vehicle -31863 – 2025 BMW X7 -Honda – lower level new Honda have dummy blind spot radars that say Dummy on it. If you replace it with a real blind spot radar, it will blow the computer. -Master and Slave Unit – check with OEM to see if Radar / Blind Spot Units have to be replaced in Pairs. -Programming Radar(s) prior to calibrating - -$400.00 -Non-DRP - $375 -DRP -Remove customer belongings prior to ADAS calibrations – 0.2 body -Secured Gateway – 0.1 mechanical – Secured gateway must be opened for access to scan and calibrations. - O nly certain vehicles have this, need information/procedure and add for labor based upon operations required). This is cyber security on the vehicle . Few examples are: -FCA/Chrysler -Infiniti -Nissan -Tesla – in some occasions. Proce Fpull dure states -Setup ADAS Equipment - 0.5 mechanical -When performing static calibrations, it will be required to measure and mark out the area, setup calibration frame, setup targets, -Simulate full fluids for ADAS calibrations – 0.2 body unit -Static Calibrations via Radar, Module, Camera - $400 - Static – is a stationary calibration, requiring targets -Static and Dynamic Calibrations - $400 + 1.0 mechanical -Wheel Alignment – required for any camera / module / static or dynamic calibration to make sure the vehicle is tried and true and driving straight. ADAS Information -ADAS relies on all other systems -ABS -Speed sensor -Etc -Nissan/INFINITI – ADAS is called a Safety Shield -Requires four-wheel alignment for ADAS calibrations – Cameras and Radars - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Rr1OCLbMUQ I-Car Class – Initialization and Calibration of Electrical Systems – 5/10/2023 -Scanning – retrieves information from the vehicle -Programming – installing the correct software so the module functions as intended -Coding – telling the module which functions to enable or disable based on vehicle options or regions -Initialization * - technicians perform this so that modules know operational limits or parameters -Calibrations – technicians perform this so that systems function as designed REMOVE NAMES?? Matt Duzel write up for 29007 Front Radar replacement, Program to Vehicle and Calibrate Put the vehicle on battery support. Health check vehicle, report attached. Relearn idle air control valve Initialized driver window and sunroof modules. Initialized Automatic Drive Positioner System Reset/Initialized Heater &amp; Air Conditioning Control System Reset steering angle sensor Checked tire pressures and reset TPMS module. Initialized and configured the front radar ACC module to the vehicle due to replacement. Established communication with the front radar ACC Module. Removed all personal items out of the vehicle. Verified coolant and oil level are at recommended levels. Received vehicle with a 1/4 fuel level. Added weight to make up for the missing fuel. Pulled the required aiming procedures. Created a centerline Measured and allocated the target placement location. Set up the target system and level in the proper location. Static aimed the ACC module due to radar replacement. Cleared all codes generated during the calibration. Test drove vehicle to verify that all modules are operational. Rescanned system to confirm no other dtcs have been generated. Aftermarket and Used Parts Operation Category When ordering / receiving Aftermarket Parts, here are some things to look for: -Lamps - Lumen tester -Condenser / Radiator / Intercooler / etc - -Count the number of fins -Count the number of lines (lines in between fins, what is name?) -Measure the size, measure the gaps, measure the hose attachment size, measure the AC line attachment size, etc -Glass -ADAS Camera functions as normal? -Defrost functions as normal? -Rain sensor functions as normal? -Metal / Aluminum Part / Panel - did you do a hardness test? will the vehicle react the same way in an accident as an OEM part? Is the part the same thickness? Is the part the same material strength (HSS, UHSS, etc) If you are using Used parts, here are some things to add: -Clean and Recondition-1.0 -Repair needed? Body work? Primer? -Overhaul – 2 nd overhaul required if you order, for example, a door that came assembled Blend Operation Category There are many reasons to blend, first, always check with your painter as paint manufacturers and painters may vary. There are multiple things to take into account, such as the following: -If you are replacing a part or panel (Fender, door, quarter, liftgate, (Bumper occasionally, depending on the color, some of the time the bumper doesn’t match neighboring panels to begin with)). Does the replacement part or panel mate to other surfaces? Such as, if you replace a fender, does it sit flush to the door? Does it sit flush to the hood? If so, typically you blend. -If you are replacing a fender and are wondering about blending the roof rail, check with the paint department on the color prior to disassembling everything up (roof rail) and back (quarter) for refinish -If you are repairing a panel, where does your bondo end? Where does your primer end? -Mating Part/Panel – if you are replacing a part/panel, what is the mating surface like to the neighboring / adjacent part/panel? Is it a large or small area? Is it the same angle or a different angle? -Repaired Part/Panel – if a part/panel has been repaired, is the repair area / bondo / primer where you will be adding color to, near the mating / neighboring part/panel? -What kind of paint is it? -Two stage -Three stage -Four stage -Metallic paint When do you choose to Refinish a panel vs a Blend? -If you are painting a fender and a rear door and the front door is inbetween both panels. You wont be extending the clear coat / blend over. You will be refinishing Body Operation Category When it comes to inspection body parts for damage, there are multiple things at play. Take the vehicle color into account when deciding between a repair and a replace, damage on darker colored vehicles are easier to see. Another thing to take into account is that just because the damage can be repaired, doesn’t always mean it should be repaired. Take into account the damage and the repair method, would that part be repaired properly. A good example of this is if the door is damaged on the edge and the framing of the door is buckled. On the exterior, yes the door can be repaired and looking good but on the inside where the outer door skin and the inner door frame meet, can that area be fixed properly back to pre loss condition? Will that framing be worked and out of spec? if the foundation of a house is compromised and you put a coat of paint over it, is it now a good foundation? Crumble zones? Work Hardened part? Color of vehicles – darker easier to see? If you can see the inner panel frame poking through the outer panel damage, what is the proper way to repair that? pictures If the vehicle has damage/dents on the door edge to quarter panel edge, how do you gauge it? How do you know how to hammer the quarter panel / door dmg out? Good indicator is to replace the door, use the new door gaps / body line to gauge how far you need to repair the quarter panel. pictures When it comes to repairing or replacing parts and panels on a vehicle, here are some operations to consider and get started: -A-Pillar – -Land Rover Defender – dash reinforcement is mounted in the way of the rivet / gun head and needs to be removed. -Add for Second Color – Inner Panels – 0.5 refinish -And add color tint and spray out cards (see - Paint Operation Category – for more) -Align - the door took enough of an impact to need replacement, which means the mounting components of door to body have been moved and needed tweaking to ensure all body lines and gaps are in spec -Body Panels - 1.0 body -Hinges - 0.3 body -Striker - 0.3 body -Aluminum facts -99% of dents on aluminum are microcracked. Need to do an attempted repair -Very hard to cold pull aluminum (for stud weld puller and repairs) -Aluminum is one of the fastest oxidation around. You have a few minutes after brushing (to apply studs, or stud weld puller). Need to brush where stud is being installed -Cannot hammer and dolly aluminum as it becomes work hardened -Backing Plates – when listed in OEM repair procedure -Fabricating Backing Plates and Installing – 1 -2 body -Ordering OEM backing plates when listed – use database install labor unit or 0.5 – 1.0 body -Aluminum Room Clean &amp; Setup - ___ -Body Plugs – Add to R&amp;I Body Plugs – 0.1 -Carpet and Insulation – 0.5 body or is this included? -Cavity Wax Injection – 0.3 body per panel -3 mils or 3 passes to be effective -Any repaired panel needs to have body wax added, 5 grams per body labor hour or 1 can per every 100 hours or 1 can a week. -Chip Guard - bill out material. There are a few different ways to write this -Chip Guard cleanup, mask, test, replicate OEM appearance – body labor unit __ -Replacing a part – Replicate chip guard OEM appearance – body labor unit __ -Some vehicles are equipped with this, such as: -Ford Pickup Trucks -Tesla Model 3 -Toyota’s -Clean, prep, re-install seals -1.0 body – need to reapply material so it adheres / sticks -Audi has the foam seals, 2023 volvo has the foam seal. Time is to remove, clean, prep, reinstall. Add line for bolted body component to, such as when the door or hood or liftgate cannot be opened and needs to be cut out -Collision Damage Access – 1.0 body – -Occurs when the outer panel is damaged beyond repair and the inner panel needs to be inspected. Prior to cutting the outer panel, document the damage with all photos, add the product used to make the access hole -Color - take the vehicle color into consideration when considering a repair or replace. Darker colored vehicles tend to show more damage -Corrosion Protection / Rust Proof – each metal / steel part being repaired and the panel being replaced -High Point / Plymouth Rock - $12.00 and 0.2 body - one line at bottom of estimate -Non-DRP – 0.1 refinish – small part -Non-DRP – 0.3 refinish- large part - Various repair procedures may require additional protection to the interior of the vehicle to prevent welding/grinding/ sanding sparks, dust going past the repair zone. Additional consideration for labor and/or materials to protect the vehicle interior is NOT INCLUDED. CCC DEG Inquiry 13434 “After review of the concern, it has been determined that covering the exterior, interior and components of the vehicle to prevent weld spark damage is not included with welded panel replacement estimated work times. -Crack Dye Test - $100.00 &amp; 0.6 body and 0.6 refinish -Used to determine if panel is cracked -Steps -1) SKC-S Aerosol – nondestructive testing material (blue) -2) SKL-SP2 Aerosol – Penetrant (white) -3) SKD-S2 Aerosol – Developer (yellow) -Used on 29954 aluminum cast front strut tower -EX: Testing RT Apron panel with dye to determine if it has cracked. - Refinish labor is to mask off suspension components -Cure Time – 0.1 structural - As per DEG inquiry this is a non-included operation -Dent Puller-$25 and 0.5 hour -Tips are as follows Used to aid in repairing dents on the following panels: -Use cutting wheel to cut off -Used to repair and pull out damage on panels. Less intrusive than replacing a panel -The tabs you use – -Scuff the side that touches the gun -Reusable, to install and remove do it straight -Do’s- to remove, twist it. To reuse cut off the end with pliers. Use a body file to remove the existing tab on the panel -Don’t’s- do not pull it as that will remove material and warp the panel. do not use rolox as that uses a lot of heat -Can bill out Dent Puller or Stud Puller and Studs as 2 separate lines. -Destructive Test Weld –1.0 each weld body – time is not associated with replacement panel. Add 0.5 per additional weld needed -Butt weld -Mig/Mag weld -Plug weld -Spot weld -Audi – save test welds for 7 years (although I cant find position statement on this) -Drill bit Lubricant - $2.00 &amp; 0.1 body – keeping tools functioning as they should -Door Skin - We at Ultimate Collision Repair do not do door skins. We replace the entire door . Reason being is you are doing the same operations for a door skin that you are for a door replace. Both require the doors to be fully disassembled, both require the front and back panel to be blended, both require seam sealer in most cases. Also faster to replace the door assy -E-Coat – Remove factory E-Coat – 0.2 body -Foam Removal, Cleanup and Apply – 0.4- 0.8 body – -30488 F-150 Raptor – Lord Fusor 121 -30452 Ford Taurus – 3M 08463 -For Fords that have expanding foam on the fender “Door removed for R Fender flexible foam application . To install the Flexible Foam to the back of the fender, Fender needs to be installed and then the flexible foam is applied from the rear. Door has to be removed for access and to allow refinishing of foam -Feather Edge and Block Sand - 25% of the repair time as a refinish labor unit -There are many ways you can term this, we at Ultimate Collision Repair have labeled it as the above line. Other ways it can be label ed: -Block Sand, Prime, Block Sand -Prime Block and Feather -State Farm does not pay for this, build it into the estimate. -Glue Pull (glue pulling) - $ 25.00 and 0.5 body -Glue Pulling is a great alternative to clamping and pulling / welding and pulling as it can be used to not damage the paint -Inertia? – example – front end impact but the back is still going X mph. -Watch crash video test to see other damages -Jig Setup – see vehicle Guidelines and Repair Procedures -Refer to – Measurement Operation Category – for more information -OEM Information is as follows -Audi – Audi Collision Repair Position Statement of Repair: Unibody Alignment and Repair -&gt; Issued on February 28, 2012 -Volkswagen – Volkswagen Collision Repair Standards -&gt; Subject: Unibody Alignment and Repair Applicable to all Volkswagen Models -&gt; Issued February 2017 -Tesla note – 8 points and procedure -Measure Gaps Pre-and Post-Repairs – 0.3 + / - body -Nutsert – is the panel equipped with Nutserts? Audi / Volkswagen Quarter panels sometimes have a nutsert in the tail lamp pocket area, in the trough area (trunk opening), or on the edge to where the bumper side bracket and vent sits -Plastic Repair -Will repairing the plastic part require material? Example: -3M 05887 EZ Sand Multi Purpose Repair Material -3M 05907 Polyolefin Adhesion Promoter -Plastic Welder - $15.00 and 0.3 body -Prepare Part for Installation - __ - remove the e-coat at the location of all GMA welds and spot welds. Scuff the e-coat for the remaining areas that the two panels will meet -Pinch Weld Damage - ___ - the repair needed to address pinch weld damage after a vehicle has been setup on a frame machine is a not included operation in CCC. -This does not apply to hidden panels that are weld zone repairs -Radar- -Body Panel that has Radar Mount - if there is damage to a panel that holds a radar, that is going to be a judgment call because every accident is different. Questions you need to ask, will that radar perform correctly if you repaired that panel -Bumper with Radar - if there is damage over the radar on a bumper, it cannot be repaired as it would jeopardize the radar function -If it is cosmetic damage such as a scratch through the clear coat, that can be fixed. -Raw Plastic Prep – 0.5 refinish -due to repairing bumper / plastic part that requires repair down to the actual raw plastic. -R&amp;I all electronics within 12” of weld zone – Labor unit can vary, typically between – 0.5-2.0 mechanical depending on vehicle -Porsche - if welding on a Porsche remove plug connections on the engine, transmission and airbag control units as per ‘5X00IN02 Protection for electric components during body repairs’ -Toyota is 18” as per ‘Toyota’s Collision Damage Repair Precautions’ -Be sure to remove all Speakers, SRS (airbags, seatbelts, sensors), in the area -Refinish backside of panel – 100% exterior refinish labor unit -When it comes to painting the backside of a panel such as a quarter panel or even a fender for example, the color is usually a different color than the exterior of the vehicle. This will require a second color to add, second color tint, second spray out card and a 2K product has to be used. A 2K product will have the proper corrosion protection -0.2 refinish - Add for masking off front side of panel (ex: Covering the front side of the panel when spraying the inside) -Relieve Pressure – 1.0 – 2.0 - if you can not pull the vehicle due to location / vehicle construction / vehicle manufacturer guidelines, you can hammer the part out to restore dimensions and relieve pressure prior to removing and replacing the panel -Remove and Cleanup Debris from Drilling / Grinding – 0.2 body - As per DEG inquiry this is a non-included operation -Repair Backside of repair panel – Time will differ &amp; include Refinish backside of panel (see note above) -Sacrificial Panel - refer to OEM procedures. A sacrificial panel is one that must be removed prior to replacing the original panel you were going with. An example could be if I have to replace a quarter panel on an Audi, the rear body panel has to be removed first. Which will then create additional paint, operations, repairs, etc. - Seam sealer – put labor units in for the department that will be doing the work. Body department – body labor unit. Paint department – paint labor unit. Few different ways to write for seam sealer. For example: -Replacement Door/Hood/Liftgate/etc – Mask, test, replicate seam sealer OEM appearance – 0.8 refinish -Replacement Quarter Panel/Rear Body Panel/etc – Seam sealer cleanup, mask, test, replicate seam sealer OEM appearance – 0.8 body -Self Tapping screw set - $20.00 and 0.5 body -Used to trial fit replacement panel and be able to close the door and liftgate to ensure proper gap dimensions. Vice grips do not allow you to close the door and liftgate in the jamb area. -Setup and Test Nutsert Gun - $15.00 &amp; 0.3 structural -Setup and Test Rivet Gun – $15.00 &amp; 0.3 structural -Sound Deadener – -OEM -Aftermarket – may need invoice, $25.00 and 0.2 body -used if there is no OEM part -Spark Paper- $5 and 0.3 body - Used to protect surrounding glass from welding sparks - Straighten the rear wheel arch flange (Quarter panel job) - ___ body -Structural Adhesive Removal – incl Reword this -Studs/Nutserts/ Rivets in panel – when it comes to installing Rivets, it is generally best to order a few more than you need so that you can test the rivets prior to installing order more than you need to test. For more information see notes down below – Reliable Automotive Class 4/6/2023 -Stud/Nutsert gun setup- $15 &amp; 0.3 body – includes gas, oil, lubrication, fitment/cylinder/nozzle/head -Install studs/nutserts – 1.0 body -Destructive Stud Test – 0.2 body -Bad Stud – falls off completely. Has a half bump/half moon on the back of the panel -Good Stud – the stud breaks in half, the head stays in the panel. Full bump/full circle on the back of the panel -Clean with solvent and degrease prior to brushing -Stainless Steel Brush – bill out per job – needs to be white so you can see pure aluminum. Brush only where the stud is going -Surge Protector – 0.2 mechanical – protects battery during body, may not apply if you disconnect battery -Tesla Cybertruck – exoskeleton is made from Ultra Hard 30x series Cold-Rolled stainless steel structural skin and Tesla armor glass. -Stainless steel may be refinished according to the specific guidelines in the Collision Repair manual in Part Repairability Guidelines &gt; Exterior Stainless Steel Panel Refinishing -All panels containing the same plane as the repair area must be refinished. So if you are repairing the front door, you have refinish the entire side of the vehicle. - Test structural adhesive prior to applying – 0.1 body -Touch up painted bolts – -Non-DRP - 0.5 refinish -Plymouth rock - 0.3 refinish -Trial Fit - use full R&amp;I labor unit of a part, example - if a door takes 1.5 body units, it will be Trial Fit 1.5 body unit. For a welded part / panel, 0.5-2.0+-. Repairs could even require the same part to be trial fit multiple times. That same door that takes 1.5 body units, could turn into 3.0 body units -Explanation of this: Trial-Fit of a component to verify dimensional accuracy of adjoining parts. Can clamp into place/vice grip, can use self tapping screws, can tack weld Examples are -State Farm does not pay for trial fit, build it into the estimate -Quarter panel – trial fit using vice grips / tack welds prior to installing -Trial fit multiple parts – ex: tail lights, weatherstrip, lock, striker, bumper, reinf - Trial fit parts pre repair, during repair, post repair -Trial fit of parts starts from the furthest point from the damage. With replacement front door, rear door, and quarter panel. Trial fit front door to fender, rear door to front door, quarter panel to rear door. -Time is to put replacement hood and hinges on vehicle to ensure gaps, dimensions, vehicle body is in spec and that the mounting points for the hinges and/or other locations are not damaged. -29813 note: Trial fit bumper with replacement radiator support. After removing damaged radiator support and installing new radiator support, adjustments will be lost and have to be aligned to ensure proper gap dimensions. -Ultra-High Strength Steel – cannot be repaired I-car says (ex: Panel Removal and Preparation for Installation pg 11/22). See OEM procedures. -Zinc and Magnesium can also not be repaired. -Wash and Tack after Blocking - $5.00 and 0.3 body -Wash and Tack after Repairs - $5.00 and 0.3 body -Weld Blankets – 0.3 body -Welding Plates / Welding Studs - $25.00 and 0.5 body -When you are repairing a panel and the damage needs to be pulled out but there is not an actual location to clamp down to (such as the middle of a quarter panel), Welding plates are used to weld to a panel to gain clamping access so that the damage can be pulled -Weld Through Primer – $10.00 -FCA US LLC (Dodge, Chrysler, etc.) does not recommend the use of any type of “weld-thru” primer during repairs. Weld-bonding with corrosion protecting adhesives or sealers, along with final application of inner panel corrosion protection is the proper method. -VW has their own – Refer to procedures. Procedure from job # 28798 – Long-Term Body Protection – D00750004 -Copper weld through primer is no good -Zinc weld through primer is good -Zinc weld through primer must be stored upside down or sideways to prevent it from clogging or having all the zinc stuck at the bottom -Welder Setup Time, Power up, Power down - $25 &amp; 0.5 body per welder -Spot Weld -Plug Weld / Mig / Mag -Welding Shield – 0.2 body -A welding shield is used to prevent sparks from flying into the neighboring vehicle, tools, equipment, etc. It is a barrier. -Welding Supply Consumables -$25 -does this include -Coatings required by OEM for welding -Cost of OEM specific welding coupons -Labor for protecting the vehicle from welding and sparks -Shielding gas -Spark deflection material -Welding tips -Welding wire (Bohler Union x96, Brazin wire, Er70s-6, OEM specific Alu wires, etc.) -Weld Zone Repair – also known as WZR, occurs when you replace a welded body panel and have to perform a repair to the mating panels. Mating panels are what touches the replacement panel, so it can consist of the visual exterior panel, the inner panel, -Small Panel - 0.5 body repair -Large Panel or two mating surfaces- 1.0 body repair -If the vehicle is welded from factory and the replacement part is bonded and riveted, you still have to perform a weld zone repair as the vehicle was once welded -If the panel is also damaged, add repair units to do the repair and repair units for the weld zone repair as it is two separate operations. Here are a few examples of these operations in action: Replacing quarter panel -Replace quarter panel – 18 body, 3.0 quarter -Refinish backside of quarter panel – 3.0 refinish -Trial Fit Quarter panel-1.0 body -Backtape Jamb-0.3 refinish -Corrosion Protection-0.3 refinish -Feather Edge &amp; Block Sand-0.3 refinish -DE-NIB-0.3 refinish -Wet/Dry Sand, Rub-Out &amp; Buff-0.9 refinish -Cavity Wax Injection-0.5 body -Quarter Glass Remove -Urethane Kit -Window Primer Weld Zone Repair: -R&amp;I All Electronics Within Weld Zone -Aperture Panel – weld zone repair in 3x locations -Roof rail area 2x from quarter panel section -Rocker panel -Inner Quarter Panel -C-Pillar -Quarter Glass Surround -Outer Wheelhouse Panel -Rear Body Panel -Rocker Panel Inner -Side Floor Extension -Tail Lamp Pocket -Trough Panel (Jamb between quarter panel and trunk opening) Trial Fit -Rear Bumper -Rear Bumper Bracket -Rear Door -Rear Door Striker -Tail Gate -Tail Lamp -Wheel – Removed and Installed Multiple Times Throughout Repair: -Disassembly -Body -Reassembly -Torque Wheel (120 Nm / 80 lb-ft) (Example numbers) Misc Operation -Measure and Mark Gap Dimensions Pre and Post Replacement-0.4 body -Weld Blankets-0.3 body -Spark Paper-$5.00 and 0.3 body -Test Structural Adhesive before Applying-0.1 body -Welder Setup, Power Up, Power Down-$50.00 and 1.0 body -Plug weld -Spot weld -Welding Consumables-$25.00 -Weld Through Primer-$10.00 -Destructive Test Weld-1.5 -Plug weld -Spot weld Repairing bumper cover -Trial fit Bumper-1.0 -Case by case scenario -Repair bumper cover – 2.0 body and 3.0 refinish -Stage and Secure Bumper for Refinish – 0.3 refinish -Raw plastic prep – 0.5 refinish -Feather Edge &amp; Block Sand- 0.5 -Adhesion Promoter – 0.3 refinish -Flex Additive - $15.00 -Flex Mixing Time – 0.3 refinish -DE-NIB – 0.3 refinish - Wet/Dry Sand, Rub-Out &amp; Buff – 0.9 refinish Repairing quarter panel -Repair quarter panel – 8.0 body and 3.0 refinish -Backtape Jamb-0.3 refinish -Corrosion Protection-0.3 refinish -Feather Edge &amp; Block Sand-2.0 refinish -8.0 x 25% = 2.0 -DE-NIB-0.3 refinish -Wet/Dry Sand, Rub-Out &amp; Buff-0.9 refinish -Dent Puller-$25.00 and 0.5 body -Cavity Wax Injection-0.3 body Bolted on Body Part Operation Category Operations to consider when you are working / writing a vehicle that requires operations to a bolted on body part: -Adjusting Door Glass Frameless Windows – not included operation as per DEG - https://degweb.org/estimate-tip-ccc-motor-adjusting-door-glass-frameless-windows/ -Actuator – for latch, anything else? -Broken door glass – always best to replace the door glass and window regulator -Add for – Glass cleanup -If applicable, remove parts to gain access to glass cleanup -Cavity Wax Injection (for steel parts) – 0.3 body -Chip Guard - lower portion of - -Door -Fender -Collision Damage Access -Occurs when the body part such as a door, hood, liftgate are damaged on the latch area and the part cannot be opened. Collision Damage Access is cutting an access hole so the area can be accessed and opened. Material used to make that access hole should be billed out as it is a not included operation / material . Bill out product used – saw blade, cutting wheel, etc. -Door Check -Loctite – is OEM Procedure stating to use Loctite? -Grease – Refer to OEM Procedure -Door handle -Window regulator -Hinges – -If aligning – 0.3 body -If replacing – stage and secure hinge(s) for refinish -Keyless Entry -Labels -check for labels -Latch and Striker– its best to replace the latch and striker when the impact has occurred in that location or if the body part itself is destroyed and the latch and striker integrity is questionable / compromised. Some latches are now electric -Latch and Striker is best replaced together -We have had Latchs working when we disassembled the vehicle and then fail upon reassembly. -Lift Cylinder – Hood / Liftgate – need to be R&amp;I’d? Need lubrication? -Lock Cylinder – is the lock cylinder damaged and needing to be replaced? Does it require a new key to be cut and coded? Do you need the vehicle owners permission per the OEM? Does the dealer need the vehicle? -Pinch Sensors -Pop - when you open the door, is there a pop to it that isnt present when opening the other doors? -Replicate seam sealer OEM appearance – 0.8 refinish (refinish due to paint team applying) -Speaker(s) – R&amp;I -Add – Test Speaker(s)-0.1 body unit -SRS Sensor – is the door equipped with an SRS Sensor (Impact sensor)? If so, replace all door hole tapes, grommets, plugs, water shield, possibly belt molding due to a difference in air pressure once removed. Is the Impact sensor needing replacement? - Replace due to difference in air pressure once removed for SRS impact sensor -Trial Fit Part (Door/Hood/Liftgate – etc) – use full R&amp;I labor unit -Trial Fit – Latch, Striker – anything else? -Washer Fluid -Washer Nozzle -Weatherstrips Here are a few examples of these operations in action: Replacing a Hood -Hood Replace – 1.2 body and 3.0 refinish -Trial Fit Hood-1.2 body -Align RT Hinge-0.3 body -Align LT Hinge-0.3 body -Replicate Seam Sealer OEM Appearance – 0.8 refinish -Stage and Secure Hood for Refinish-0.2 refinish -DE-NIB-3.0 x 20% = 0.6 -Wet/Dry Sand, Rub-Out &amp; Buff-3.0 x 30% = 0.9 -Cavity Wax Injection-0.3 body -R&amp;I RT Lift Cylinder-0.2 body -R&amp;I LT Lift Cylinder-0.2 body -Replace Emission Label -Replace AC Label -IPA Wipe -For Emission Label -For AC Label Replacing a Front door -Front Door Replace-5.0 body and 3.0 refinish -Trial fit Door – 1.5 - R&amp;I labor unit -Replicate Seam Sealer OEM Appearance- 0.8 refinish -Stage and Secure Front Door for Refinish-0.2 refinish -DE-NIB-2.0 x 10% = 0.2 refinish -Wet/Dry Sand, Rub-Out &amp; Buff-2.0 x 30% = 0.6 refinish -Cavity Wax Injection-0.3 body -R&amp;I Door Check-0.2 -Align Upper Hinge-0.3 body -Align Lower Hinge-0.3 body -Trial Fit Latch-0.4 -Align Striker-0.3 Cover Car Operation Category A vehicle can be covered in multiple ways and for multiple reasons, here are operations that can apply: - $5.00+- and 0.2+- body - 0.2+- refinish -Back Tape Jamb – 0.2-0.5 refinish -Can list under each part/panel or as a one line at the bottom noted with the parts/panels needed -Bumper – Mask backside of Bumper for refinish – 0.2 refinish -Mask backside of Bumper for ACC Radar / Blind Spot Radar prior to painting to prevent paint residue and extra paint thickness -Clean and Cover Car for Primer – 0.3 Refinish -Collision Wrap - $25+- each panel &amp; 0.3+- body each panel -Make sure the collision wrap you are using has UV protection -Cover and Protect AC Lines - $3.00 and 0.2 -Cover and Protect E lectrical C onnections (Mask plugs) - $5.00+- and 0.3+- body -Cover and Protect fuel tank opening -$3.00 and 0.2 body -Cover Car for Edging – 0.3 Refinish -Cover Car for Storage – 0.2 Refinish -Cover Car for Overspray – 0.2 Refinish -Cover Engine/Front Compartment – 0.2 Refinish -Cover Glass Opening for Repair/Refinish – 0.3 refinish -If windshield / back glass / quarter glass was removed -Cover Interior and Jambs for Refinish – 0.2 Refinish -Cover Interior and Jambs for Repairs- $5.00 and 0.2 body – due to body department doing -Cover Interior of Pickup Bed – 0.3 refinish -Cover Trunk Compartment – 0.2 Refinish -Cover Suspension Components for Repairs – $5.00 and 0.2 body – due to body department doing -Cover Vehicle Exterior for Repairs – $5.00 and 0.2 body -due to body department doing -Mask and Tape Windshield/Back Glass/Roof Glass -For Repairs - $3.00 and 0.3 body for small glass. $5.00 and 0.5 body for large glass -For Refinish – 0.3 refinish for small glass. 0.5 refinish -Mask for Buff ing – 0.5 refinish -Mask for Cavity Wax Injection – 0.2 refinish -Examples of what to mask are: Brakes, exhaust system, interior trims, propeller shaft, serpentine belt, suspension components, etc -Mask and Tape Luggage Bar - 0.3 - 0.5 refinish -Mask for Undercoat–0.5 refinish -Mask off backside of Part for repair and refinish - 0.2 refinish -Mask seamless roof panel for refinish - 0.5 refinish – per side -When vehicles do not have a roof molding or a gap and are seamless into the roof panel, you can mask the roof panel from the roof rail -Example is listed below at the bottom of this category -Mask textured portion of bumper cover (or other part) for refinish - 0. 3 refinish -Weld Blankets – 0.3 body -Doesn’t only have to be used for welds , can be used for sparks -Seat and Steering wheel cover - $5.00 and 0.2 body -Spark Paper - $5.00 and 0.3 Body Seamless roof panel example Non-seamless roof panel example Electrical Operation Category As vehicles get more and more advanced, here are some operations to check into -Battery Support - 0.2 mechanical -Required to maintain constant voltage during scan process. -Charge and Maintain Battery – -For ADAS -For Electric Vehicles -Charge and maintain battery is for the HV Battery Level and the 12v battery. -Non-DRP -$25.00 and 0.6 mechanical -DRP - $10.00 and 0.3 mechanical -Charger - do you have the correct charger for the electric vehicle? Does the customer have their vehicle charger in their vehicle? Do you have to order an adapter? -Cover and Protect Electrical Connections - $5.00 and 0.3 body -Disconnect &amp; Reconnect Battery – 0.4 mechanical -Diesel / Dually / Dual Battery – 0.8 mechanical -Electronic Reset- 0.5 mechanical -Reset electronic memory functions after battery disconnect -Reset vehicle owner settings -High Voltage Battery Removal -Access – remove trims, undershields, etc -Battery Table – 0.2 body unit -Coolant -High Voltage Disable / Enable - book labor unit -R&amp;I trims to access – if applicable -Jump Start a dead vehicle- -0.2 mechanical, add time for access if need be -Tesla CyberTruck location – front trunk access below front left wheel well, behind headlights -Mobile Cart for EV – -Non-DRP - $50.00 and 0.5 body -DRP - $25.00 and 0.3 body -Add line note here -Multipurpose Grease - $2.00 and 0.1 mechanical -Honda – Battery D&amp;R -Toyota -Note procedure that requires this -Scans- -Setup Scan Tool – 0.2 mechanical -Pre-Scan – $150 - mechanical -before disassembly -In-Process Scan – $150 - after reassembly, before calibrations -Post-Scan-$150 - after calibrations, after road test -Rivian -Pre-Scan-1.0 mechanical -In-Process Scan-1.0 mechanical -Post-Scan-1.0 mechanical -Tesla -Trim to access scanner – 0.3 body unit -Tesla Toolbox Scan – 1.0 mechanical -Tesla Software Script Programming – all DTC’s x 0.1 M and calibrations -Test Battery Condition – 0.2 Mechanical - Low battery voltage and/or repair procedures may inadvertently set multiple DTCs. Clear DTCs, and determine which ones reset after battery voltage is stabilized -Here are four possible 12 volt battery conditions via ALLDATA for 2020 honda accord sedan, 12 Volt Battery Removal, Installation, Test -Good battery- the 12 volt battery has at least 60 percent of its charge and required no action -GR8 diagnostics needed-the battery voltage is below 60 percent of its state-of-charge, and the condition of the 12 volt battery is unknown. Use the GR8 to charge the 12 volt battery and properly diagnose it -Replace Battery-the 12 volt battery condition is poor. Replace it -Bad cell-there is an internal problem with the 12 volt battery. Replace it -2018 Land Rover Range Rover -Before disconnecting battery “The vehicle status and battery condition must be established before attempting battery disconnect/connect. Reference must then be made to the following table to establish relevant procedures to be followed -Trims - any trims / covers have to be removed for access to battery, scan tool, or high voltage? -Verify No High Voltage - 0.2 mechanical -Wire Repair - wire repairs can be a bit interesting as just about every OEM has their own Position Statement in regards to wire repairs. Refer to OEM procedure. -Wire Repair - 1.0+- mechanical -Wire Repair Kit - $15+- for materials -Work After Disconnecting Battery -Porsche – 2.0 mechanical Frame Operation Category Frame description- change to - if the vehicle has frame damage and is requiring a replacement, here are some operations to take into account: -Note – more detailed explanation per line item will be found in the Operation Category associated with the work needing to be performed -Brakes -Bleed Brake System -Brake Fluid - Replace -Brake Lines – R&amp;I -Set or adjust parking brake -Release parking brake – 0.2 m -Bumpers – front and rear R&amp;I -Condenser – R&amp;I -AC Lines – R&amp;I -Protect AC Lines -Replace O-Rings -Climate Control System Check -Engine R&amp;I -Engine Hoist – 0.3 m -Evacuate &amp; Recharge -Refrigerant Recovery -Refrigerant and Refrigerant Oil Replace -Cut Up and Dispose of Shipping Crate - $50.00 and 1.0 body -Engine – R&amp;I -Air Box and Components– R&amp;I -Engine Oil and Oil Filter – may need replacement -Exhaust System – R&amp;I -Replace gaskets? Clamps? -Four Wheel Alignment -Frame Bolts to Cab -Frame Clamps – 0.2 F -Frame Disposal - $750.00 -Fuel Tank – R&amp;I -Depressurize / Pressurize Fuel Tank – 1.0 mechanical -Drain Fuel Tank and Replace Fuel - $50.00 and 0.5 mechanical -Hitch – R&amp;I -Intercooler – R&amp;I -Liners – R&amp;I -Fender Liners -Quarter Panel Liners -Measure – damaged frame and new frame -Pickup Bed – R&amp;I -Bed Bolts -Rhino Liner – remove, replace ? -Tailgate R&amp;I -Tail lights R&amp;I -Radiator -R&amp;I -Coolant -Hoses – R&amp;I -R&amp;I All Electronics Within Engine Bay – 3.0 Mechanical -Spring Compressor – for how ever many springs are on the vehicle -Suspension – R&amp;I -One time use components -Trans cooler – R&amp;I -Trans fluid – replace -Unload Frame from Shipping Vehicle - $200 -Under Shields – R&amp;I -Washer Bottle – R&amp;I -Washer Fluid – repl $ and labor unit -Wheels – 4x R&amp;I -How many times does it need to be removed and installed? -Disassembly -Measurement -Body / Frame Replace -Reassembly -Remove Wheel Covers or Center Caps -Torque Wheels Glass Operation Category -Access - remove trim panels for access -Broken glass cleanup – 1.0 – 2.0 body -Depending on which glass was broken and to what extent, here are some following operations you can write for: -R&amp;I Instrument Panel and Ducts -Test A/C to make sure it is not in vents -Wiper blades – if the glass is broken, check the wiper blades for shards of glass. Depending on the severity, it is best to replace -Cowl -Dash Cam – front and/or rear -Defroster - check defrost function-0. 2 body -EZ Pass Velcro -Gel Pack – replace on windshield for the rain sensor -Hyundai – Quarter glass are bolt in with butyl tape 3M 08610 -Inspection Sticker - R&amp;I -Mask and Tape – $3.00+- and 0.3+- body/ 0.3+- refinish for glass -Mask glass opening for refinish – 0.3 refinish (small glass). 0.6 refinish (large glass) -Mask glass opening for repair – 0.3 refinish (small glass), 0.6 refinish (large glass) -Primer – apply primer to removed glass area. Procedure must state the following. Use OEM or equivalent as stated -Body Primer -Glass Primer – - $20.00 and 0.6 body (large glass) per - $10.00 and 0.3 body (small glass) per -Toyota / Lexus – removing windshield, the customer needs to reach out to XM radio for Service Mode otherwise it will call the police / 911. -Urethane kit – apply OEM urethane or equivalent as stated in OEM Repair Procedures -OEM Price -Labor unit – 0.8 body Large glass -Labor unit – 0.5 body Small glass -Equivalent - $30.00 Large glass or $20.00 Small glass -Using the OEM urethane or equivalent as stated is highly important in the event of an accident, using anything inferior will put the occupants at risk. In some vehicles, airbags will deploy and bounce off the windshield and if the incorrect urethane was used, the airbag may not bounce off the windshield and protect the occupants, it may go straight through the windshield -Vent Glass (Glass on A-Pillar or Front Door) -Washer Fluid -Windshield – foam tape/frit around the dash. Should be replaced. See I-Car notes under Damage Analysis of Stationary Glass -Window tint – sublet -Check and see if its covered on the vehicle owner policy -Wiper(s) Examples of how to write operation for a glass – remove this below or what? Cant use all this from someone else? for example a quarter glass is coming out of a vehicle and the area gets damaged 1) Add additional repair time 2) Sand the area down to bare metal (if no urethane is left) 3) Time to remove the urethane 4) Add and bill out epoxy primer 5) Add paint time 6) Mask 7) Reapply urethane if for example you are replacing a suburban windshield (roof replacement job) 1) Windshield Primer Applicator - $3.00 2) Windshield Pinch Weld Primer - $18.95 &amp; 0.2 G 3) Glass Surface Primer - $25.95 4) Urethane Adhesive Non-OEM – 2x $45.00 5) Urethane Adhesive Glass Stick - $1.50 6) Glass Cut Out Wire - $45.50 7) Razor Blades Cut Out Knife - $2.00 8) Razor Blades - $0.20 9) Glass Clean Up of Interior Components – 0.3 3 10) Mask Windshield Opening - $10.00 &amp; 1.0 3 11) Mask dash/instrumental panel for glass removal - $5.00 &amp; 0.3 3 For the RT &amp; LT Quarter glass R&amp;I he charged out 1) Glass Primer Applicator – 2x $6.00 2) Urethane Adhesive Non-OEM – 2x $45.00 3) Urethane Adhesive Glass Stick - $1.50 4) Glass Cut Out Wire - $45.50 5) Razor Blades Cut Out Knife – 2x $4.00 6) Glass clean up of interior components – 0.2 body 7) RT mask side glass - $3.00 and 0.2 3 8) LT mask side glass - $3.00 and 0.2 3 Invoice and Product Category Not included materials and products that are necessary for to fix a vehicle properly: Misc - loctite delete. Relocate to billable -Butyl tape -Cavity wax -Coarse Brush - removes seam sealer -Cutting wheel -Double sided tape -Drill bits -Expanding foam -Loctite -Mask and protect removed components -Primer -Body Primer -Glass Primer -Refinish Material Invoice -Describe what this is or can be -Sander belt -Saw blade -Seam sealer -Shop stock parts -Structural adhesive -Urethane -Welders – note the amount of welders required to repair that vehicle. Examples: -Plastic welder -Plug welder / Mig / Mag welder -for aluminum -for steel -Spot welder -for aluminum -for steel Misc Operation Category Relocate? -Adhesion Promoter- -DRP - $10.00 -Non-DRP - 0.3 refinish -Adhesive Cleanup – 0.2-+ body or refinish – depends on which department is doing it and depends on how much of a cleanup is needed -Adjust/Aim headlamps &amp; foglamps – If no wheel alignment on estimate, add – Check and Adjust Tire Pressure for Aiming of Lamps – 0.2 mechanical -Amazon –Add for Amazon Prime – portion of the subscription -Align Tesla Model X Falcon Door – 2.0 body – refer to 70 page alignment procedure TN-16-11-002 -Anti Theft Label – ECSVin - An anti theft label is a label that has the vin number on it -Using ECSVin because some OEM Manufacturers do not produce this label and some OEM Manufacturers produce the label but take many weeks and require the vehicle in their possession -$29.95 list price per label -$10.00 shipping – for all labels -Vehicles that are equipped with Anti Theft Labels are -Hyundai -Volvo -Attempted Buff- 0.3 refinish -Attempted to buff scuffs / scratches. Chips still present. Clean section? -Biohazard clean (Bodily fluids) – -$10.00 and 0.5 body - $25.00 and 1.0 body -Replace all hardware due to biohazard (deer hit, etc) -Black Out Tape on doors -Car Wash Mode – 0.1 mechanical -Rivian -Charge and Maintain Battery Voltage – ___ time - used during scans -Center console R&amp;I/ Replacement – R&amp;I customer belongings – 0.2 body -Child seat installed in car during accident – review manufacturer position statements on accident. Sometimes can’t be reused. -Clean and Retape - $10-+ &amp; 0.3-+ body -Clean, Sand and Prep Panel - ____ -Wash __ for for priming – bed for ex: $5.00 &amp; 0.5 body -Wash and prep __ for refinish/booth – bed for ex: $8.00 &amp; 0.8 body -Wash vehicle after glaze for reassembly – pickup truck for ex: $5.00 &amp; 0.3 body -Final wash, detail and vacuum of vehicle – pickup truck for ex: $10.00 &amp; 2.0 body -Clear Circle Tape - $5.00 and 0.3 body -Labor unit and amount is to recreate a plastic circle tape and install to vehicle. -Clear Circle Tape is used as a bumper stop. Located in multiple areas on certain vehicles such as on the underside of the hood, dogleg panel, rear bumper - to protect the paint from the bumper. -Credit Card Fee – 3.5% of payment if customer used credit card. Customer pay only as its their choice to pay with Credit Card – should be customer who chose the credit card -Crash Wrap - $25.00 and 0.2 / each -For moisture shields so that it doesn’t get the sticky all over - Used to prevent the sticky from getting everywhere -Customer Belongings – did you have to remove customer belongings from trunk? Frunk? Center console? Inside? To work on vehicle? For ADAS calibrations? -Dashboard Remove or Replace – do refrigerant? -DE-NIB - Plymouth Rock and High Point cut the time in half one, one line at the bottom with Wet/Dry Sand, Rub-out &amp; Buff added. One time - 20% full refinish time of parts that face the sky such as Hood, Roof, Trunk lid. One time – 10% full refinish time of first part being DE-NIBBED. Every additional part – 5% full refinish time -Drill holes for license plate/bracket – 0.2 body -Emblems and Nameplates – - Jig setup labor unit used for install -Measure and mark template for installation - $2.00 and 0.2 per emblem / nameplate(If jig is not available) -See image below at bottom of this category -Exhaust Damage -what to look for when analyzing an exhaust system -Bends – is the exhaust bent in a direction? -Brackets – are the brackets bent? Broken? -Hangers – are the hangers damaged? Are the hangers pushed back? -Height – -Dual Exhaust - is the Right and Left side different heights? One higher than the other? -Single Exhaust – is the exhaust too high or too low? -Edge Bumper – 0.5 refinish – sharp bumper cover with multiple angles, this is to get into those crevices -Extra Rivets Needed? Example: - 7x quantity needed. 9x needed, 2 to test prior to installing -Fender Replace (Model 3)- -Urethane and Primer- $15.00 and 0.4 body -Front Camera – -When installing the front camera to the grille, does the grille require modification for the camera to fit? Audi for example does not have the cut-out on a replacement grille – 0.5 body unit -Heat Gun – does a part need to be heated up to be removed/installed? Such as a part that has an expanding element to it or a molding tape? -H Notes – check in Estimating database / DEG for related/unrelated operations -Impact sensor – always R&amp;I - Removed to prevent accident SRS deployment while vehicle is being worked on / transported -Instrument Panel / Speakers / Radio Unit / Gauge Cluster – test gauge cluster and sound system due to removal – 0.3 -IPA Wipe - $2.00 per wipe needed and 0.1 body - Used to clean and degrease surface before installing (examples listed below): -Nameplate -Weatherstrip -License Plate R&amp;I – 0.2 body -Lifting Attachment - certain vehicles may need a specific attachment just to be able to lift the vehicle, this is a non-included operation -C8 Corvette – when lifting the vehicle, vehicle has to be strapped to the hoist – as per I-Car Class Corvette C8 -Ramps – is the vehicle low and requires ramps to drive up on so that the vehicle can be lifted -Rivian - for example requires specific attachments to lift the vehicle -Loctite 222 - $2.00 and 0.1 body -Mask and protect removed components - $10 &amp; 0.3 body + -Measure and mark gap dimensions– 0.3-+ body -As per Rivian online class ‘Collision: Rivian R1T Body Panel Adjustment Tips’ “Adjusting Body Panel Flushness – to reduce wind noise, body panels should protrude slightly to allow air to flow over the gaps and edges of panels. Starting with the vehicle’s fender, the trailing edge of one panel should protrude slightly to the adjacent panel’s leading edge” -Saved to Onedrive -Mercedes-Benz Headlamp Replacement - for 2019 models and newer, take a picture of the QR code on the headlamp. In the event that we cannot program the headlamp, the dealer will need the QR code. If you do not have a picture of the QR code, the dealer will have to remove the headlamp. -Mode -Jack Mode – Tesla with air suspension -Molykote M-77 - $2.00 and 0.1 mechanical Relocate to electrical -Multimeter check – 0.2 mechanical -No Object Present Check (Model X – Rear door) – 0.5 Mechanical -Measure and mark out for this – incl. -OnStar Functionality/SOS Feature Disable/Enable - 0.5 mechanical labor unit -may need programming such as 29856 SOS BMW feature -PPF – -Customer must check their policy and make sure its covered -Penetrox A-13 Electrical Joint Compound - $2.00 and 0.1 mechanical -Piano Finish – Re-clear panels Clean section? -Pre-wash and degrease vehicle –$10.00 and 0.5 body -Could write as: pre-wash and degrease vehicle prior to repairing -Prop fuel tank – 0.3 -Rearview Mirror Replace – do you need to calibrate the compass? 2021 Audi Q5 does -Remove door open switch/button in jamb (to not drain battery) – 0.2 body -May need to remove interior trim to access -Remove Shipping/Parts Labels (per label) - $3.00 &amp; 0. 1 -Rivian Rear Bluetooth Module – needs to be updated and paired with vehicle by a Rivian member. Part numbers are -C100039252F - PT00039252G -Scaffolding Equipment / Ladder / Bench – 0.2 body -Due to height of vehicle -Used for access to roof repair -Used for access to side panel -Used to work on higher up area of vehicle such as a roof repair or a large van side panel Relocate to your own internal notes? -Service Appointment Setting- -Rivian – Call SSOC and have them setup the work order. Then call over to the Service Center, relay all the information, setup the service. -Service Mode (Tesla) – 0.1 mechanical - time to activate/deactivate service mode, disable/re-enable systems/cameras, deactivate/activate customer connectivity Relocate to electrical? SOP? -Simulate full fluids for Headlamp aiming – 0.2 body - Simulate full fluids so that vehicle is at proper weight for aiming -Siphon fuel from damaged fuel tank to new fuel tank – 1.0M -Speaker – remove and install speaker, Test speaker -0.1 Relocate these 3? -Steering Angle Sensor – 1.0 mechanical – required with wheel alignment – steering angle sensor will disable many ADAS features without setting a DTC or warning light – NOTE – sometimes Steering Angle Sensor comes up on ADAS Sheet -Sublet(s) – the markup on the sublet bill (dealer, glass, calibrations) is for risk. Risk of comeback, error, redo, malfunction -Tap and Die Set - $10.00 and 0.5-1.0 -+ -___ Bolts are broken inside. Tap and Die set used to remove bolt, clean and rethread -Tesla Model 3 – Qtr upper trim tether clip part numbers -1090272-00-B -1127466-00-B -Tesla Model X door replacement – -M5 Rivnut – 1037045-00-A -M6 Rivnut – 1014179-00-A -Torqueing of fasteners – CCC, Audatex, and Mitchell are included. Labor to look up or the cost associated with locating the torque specifications is NOT included. -Test Mirror Features, Functions, Operation – 0.1-0.2 body – unless included with labor unit -Automatic day-night function -Heated -Power Folding, Power mirror movement -Blind Spot Feature working Change to Loctite notes? -Three Bond 1324 – cant get, use Loctite Blue 242 - $2.00 and 0.1, saved to folders -Tow Bill - to Dealer/Tint shop for ____ – $45 (tax) labor, $115 (tax) towing charge, then mileage times 6. -Include Dealer Wait Time – 0.3 body – to discuss in person, to wait for vehicle, etc -Undercoat – 0.3-0.5 refinish -Usage Mode (Volvo) – 0.1 mechanical -V-Bar grille (Tesla Model S and X – add for these. 2.0 refinish. -Comes unpainted: - Refinish - 1.0 -Add for second color - gloss black - 0.5 -Prep unprimed part - 0.5 --Add for stage and secure, Flex, DE-NIB, Buff -Volvo - Usage/Activate/Inactive Mode – 0.1 mechanical -VSA Sensor Neutral Position Memorization (Honda) – 0.2M -Washer Fluid - $5.00 Taxed and 0.3 body -Water shield -Honda Adhesive – 08712-0003 -Wet/Dry Sand, Rub-out &amp; Buff -High Point / Plymouth Rock – write as one line at the bottom, including DE-NIB. Buff = 30% of all exterior parts, DE-NIB – take your total labor unit and cut in half. -Non-DRP – 30% of all exterior painted panel. -Wheel Dollys – 0.2 – 0.5 -+ - Labor unit is to put vehicle onto wheel dollys and with multiple people, push vehicle inside shop for disassembly, push vehicle outside of shop post disassembly, push vehicle back inside shop for suspension replace -Weatherstrip Clips – replacing weatherstrip clips are not included with removing and installing weatherstrip. Can have this as included with ‘Transfer Hardware’ line -Measure and mark emblem/nameplate template for installation example: Measurement Operation Category Every vehicle should be measured in one way or another. There are multiple ways to measure a vehicle depending on the extent of the damage. Before doing any type of measuring, check and remove any parts for access. Listed below are operations regarding Measurements: Car Bench usage tip – minus on the jigs have to be facing in, positive facing out -Clamp Mark Repair (Frame Bench) – 0.4 body and 0.4 refinish -Mask Underside for Clamp Mark Repair Remove the following or re-word it?? I don’t believe its my writing, maybe from a class or someone else -Clamp Marking -clamps used for securing unitized and full frame vehicles to equipment for measuring and repair purposes leave contact witness marks that typically require multiple operations to correct -Pinch Weld Clamping – rocker pinch weld clamps on unitized vehicles deform, disrupt, and pierce paint and chip-resistance coatings. Removal of coatings at contact location that may build up on clamps and reduce their gripping ability is highly recommended. E-coat, chip resistance PVC and primer coatings and topcoats need to be restored to provide the same level of appearance and corrosion protection as the original coatings. To replicate factory e-coat, apply a two-part epoxy primer before applying chip-resistant coatings and topcoats. -Frame clamping – frame clamping also causes witness marks that need to be restored to provide the same level of appearance and corrosion protection as the original coatings. Frame clamp marks should be smoothed then coated with two-part epoxy primer and a single-stage topcoat to match -Clamp mark repair/refinish -different for every job – 1.0 repair/refinish (add clearcoat) (also corrosion protection and feather edge n block sand) -Clamp marking – clamps used for securing unitized and full frame vehicles to equipment for measuring and repair purposes leave contact witness marks that typically require multiple operations to correct -Frame Clamps (Body On Frame Vehicles) – clamp to frame instead of pinch welds – 0.2 R&amp;I -Full Jig Setup – 8.0 Frame -Things to check on, add, review with technician. -Check Approved Jig Build Sheet, some may have with or without suspension in -Remove Front Bumper -Remove Rear Bumper -Remove all Under shields -Remove all 4 Wheels -Jig Arm Attachment, setup, position, takedown – 3.0 fram e -Maserati – Car Bench -Measure and Mark Out Gap Dimensions – 0.4+- -Can be written out in multiple ways -Pre disassembly -Pre and post part replacement -Measure Underside Pre , In Process, Post Repairs /Replacements – 3.0 frame -Add 3D arm attachment for measuring B-Pillar, Door Opening Panel, Engine Compartment, etc – 0.5 frame -Porsche – Car-O-Liner -Pinch Welds – 0.4 body and 0.4 refinish -Remove any chip guard, seam sealer, undercoat prior to clamping vehicle -Remove any parts in the way for access -Rocker moldings -Under shields - Pull Damage and restore dimensions - if allowed by OEM and labor unit differs per damage -B-Pillars on Vehicle – B-Pillars are designed to absorb an impact and are not designed to collapse like other parts of a vehicle. Pulling a B-Pillar will require more labor unit and may not restore the dimensions as pre loss condition -Depending on the extent of the damage, the damage must be pulled out to restore as much of the dimensions as possible and to relieve as much pressure as possible. -Bonded and Riveted vehicles cannot be pulled as it will compromise the bond, the rivets, the structural integrity -Requires vehicle to be secured and clamped down to pull -Setup and Takedown Pull Tower – 0.5 frame -Weld Plates $25 and 1.0 to create an area to pull -Setup – 2.5 frame -Tram Gauge – 0.4 +- body -Truck clamps (body-on-frame vehicle)-0.2 F Paint Operation Category Paint Code formula should be documented on every repair plan, showing that the paint code is 2 / 3 / 4 stage -Add for Second Color – (example) – Inner Panels -0.5 refinish -Add for Second Color Clear – Inner Panels – 0.5 refinish -Add for Third Color – (example) Gloss Black -0.5 – 1.0 refinish - Add for Matte color, Matte clear $$, Extra labor unit due to not being able to de-nib or buff -Booth Maintenance - As per DEG inquiry this is a non-included operation -Bumper – Mask backside of Bumper for refinish – 0.2 refinish -Mask backside of Bumper for ACC Radar / Blind Spot Radar prior to painting to prevent paint residue and extra paint thickness -Mask backside of Bumper for Blind Spot Radar prior to painting to prevent paint residue and extra paint thickness -Bentley Re-Clear – re-clear on the panels/parts -Bentley re clear Paint vehicle, use regular clear, then sand down, then repaint with matte clear. Matte clear may not have UV protection so you paint with regular clear and then repaint it with matte clear 1 - e coat 2 - primer 3- base coat 4- regular clear Sand down 5- matte clear -Color Tint – -Two Stage 0.5 (Base Clear) -Three Stage 1.0 (Three Stage) -Four Stage 1.5 (Four Stage) refinish -EV Vehicles – have a paint booth temperature and time limit, see graph at bottom of section -Flex Additive – -$9.00 DRP – High Point / Plymouth Rock -$15.00 Non-DRP -$10.00 additional part – Non-DRP -Flex Mixing Time –0.3 refinish -Labor unit is to mix Flex Additive into the paint that is used on the Bumper cover (or other flexible plastic part) so that the bumper can flex with paint and not be damaged in the process -Spray Out Cards – 0.5 (Base Clear ) 1.0 ( Three Stage) / 1.5 (Four Stage) refinish -Color Tint and Spray Out cards can be written multiple times per vehicle for operations such as -Color Tint/Spray Out Cards – Body Color -Color Tint/Spray Out Cards – Bumper paint code R for Radar -Color Tint/Spray Out Cards – Inner Panels -Color Tint/Spray Out Cards – Second Color (example - Gloss black, metallic, etc) -Color Tint/Spray Out Cards – Third Color (same as above) -Four Stage Refinish – this is a manual entered line due to Estimating Databases not having a Four Stage Option. Calculation on adding Four Stage Refinish is to take all the paint units for the parts that will be buffed and then x 25% = the number. Example -Bumper – 3.0 -Door (Full paint unit is 3.0 but refinishing the door / buffing, only will be based off of 2.0 refinish unit) – 2.0 -Hood – 3.0 =8 x 25% = 2.0 refinish unit -Matte Clear - $$ -Monitor Flash and Cure Time – 0.2 refinish - As per DEG inquiry this is a non-included operation - Monitor flash times during bake cycles --- Flash times need to be monitored based on ambient air temperature, bake temperature, and drying times as per the paint manufacturer -Prep Unprimed Bumper -Quarter Panel Lock Pillar – lock pillar is the jam/recessed area located behind the door and the “edges and pockets” is the area located under or behind the bumper, trunk lid and/or liftgate when closed INCLUDEPICTURE \d "https://content.app-us1.com/cdn-cgi/image/width=650,dpr=2,fit=scale-down,format=auto,onerror=redirect/4PRq1/2025/02/10/9a5dfbf6-b920-426d-8017-23288f8a6593.png?r=2116154898" \y \* MERGEFORMATINET \x -Raw plastic prep/unprimed plastic components – Front and Rear bumpers usually have this in additional operations at the bottom but other parts such as rockers, mirror caps or other plastic parts that need to be painted do not. -CCC – 25% of the components base refinish time (maximum time allocation: 1.0 hours. Included removal of mold-release agents as outlined by manufacture, masking (if required), Application of adhesion promoter) – Not included: Correction of pre-existent surface imperfections, material cost -Mitchell – allow .2 per refinish hour (20%) for plastic components that come from the manufacturer/supplier in a raw/un-primed state. Included operations: Detergent wash, Alcohol/plastic cleaner wash, Additional solvent wash, Application of specialized adhesion promoter, clean equipment. -Audatex – the Audatex formula for preparation of a raw, unprimed bumper cover or plastic part is 20% of the base refinish labor -Find this in – Reference Information –&gt; Additional Operations –&gt; Refinish –&gt; Raw Substrate Prep and “Allow 0.2 per refinish hour (20%) for plastic components that come from the manufacturer/supplier in a raw/un-primed state” -Refinish backside of panel – 100% of the exterior refinish labor unit. - Example – quarter -2.6 exterior refinish labor unit = 2.6 refinish labor unit for backside -Use a 2K product (2K product has a hardener). Needs to be mixed and painted in a paint booth. The EzCoat does is not corrosion protection -Stage and Secure (Insert Part Name) to stand for Refinish – -DRP – small or easy part $2.00 and 0.1 or large or hard part $3.00 and 0.2 body -Non-DRP – small / easy part 0.2 refinish or large / hard part 0.3 refinish -Examples of a small / easy part to stage and secure – door, liftgate -Examples of a large / hard part to stage and secure – bumper, fender -Examples of a notation if required -labor unit is to properly secure a loose and floppy bumper cover to a stand to ensure it is secured down so that it does not move during the painting process. Time also includes getting the stand. This is not an included operation with painting the bumper -labor unit is to secure both brackets to refinish them all the way around. This is not an included operation with painting the brackets -Special Color Tint - is an expensive tint that is required for that paint code, example of this would be 90-3A0 which costs around $1,300 currently vs other tints costing around $300. Also for an expensive tint, how often are you using that tint? For us, it isn't an everyday usage so we don't typically stock it, so the only way we would get it would be to buy the entire thing -Two Tone Paint- if a vehicle is / has two tone paint such as a door being painted silver and the lower portion being painted black. Add double lines for paint -Cover Car / Mask – twice – due to painting vehicle / part two different colors OEM Paint Booth Temperature or Surface Temperature Time Limit Ambient or Surface Temperature Audi 131°F (55°C) 1 Hour Surface BMW / Mini 140°F (60°C) 2 Hours Surface Stellantis 165°F (74°C) 1 Hour Surface Ford / Lincoln 140°F (60°C) 45 Minutes Ambient General Motors 140°F (60°C) 40 Minutes Ambient Honda / Acura 149°F (65°C) None Ambient Hyundai / Genesis 158°F (70°C) 30 Minutes Ambient 176°F (80°C) 20 Minutes Jaguar / Land Rover 176°F (80°C) 1 Hour Ambient Kia 158°F (70°C) 30 Minutes Ambient 176°F (80°C) 20 Minutes Mazda 140°F (60°C) 45 Minutes Surface Mercedes-Benz 167°F (75°C) None Ambient Mitsubishi 140°F (60°C) 45 Minutes Ambient Nissan / INFINITI 140°F (60°C) None Surface Rivian 150°F (65°C) 55 Minutes Ambient Subaru (except Solterra) 122°F (50°C) 1 Hour Ambient Tesla 165°F (74°C) 45 Minutes Surface Toyota / Lexus / Scion None None - Volkswagen 176°F (80°C) 30 Minutes Surface 140°F (60°C) 45 Minutes Volvo 170°F (77°C) None Ambient Pickup Bed Operations -Bed bolts &amp; nuts to frame must always be replaced (ex: F-250 RO# 27035 – located under Pick Up Box -&gt; Floor Pan -&gt; bolts &amp; nuts -Bed Disposal (complete bed, see 27912) - $300 -Bed Liner - Some pickup trucks such as Ford, have a plastic bed liner that is extra part that will need to be removed or replaced -Blend Cab and Rear Door – usually required due to large mating surface from bed to cab and since the cab is typically a small area, its best to blend the rear door also. Check with painter -Cover Fuel Tank Opening – 0.2 refinish -Measure Bed – 1.0F -Replace Pickup Bed Assembly – -Check paint for -Blending RT and LT C-Pillar / Uniside -Blending RT and LT Rear Door -R&amp;I Pickup B ed - book labor unit -R&amp;I Tail gate - book labor unit -Rhino Liner - rhino liner would have to removed for a few reasons. One is if the bolts are underneath the rhino liner, you would have to remove it. Second would be if you are replacing the bedside, you may have to remove the rhino liner prior to welding -Remove rhino liner - 1.0-2.0+- -Tow to Rhino Liner from Shop - Setup bed lifting device – 0 2 body via bed lifter / stand / fixture -Use of the bed lifting device is included but the setup of the bed lifting device is not included -Sublet Rhino Liner -Tow to Shop from Rhino Liner -Tonneau Cover Post Repair Inspections Operation Category When it comes to inspecting a vehicle for Post Repair Inspections, here are some things to look for: -Bondo - is the vehicle caked in bondo? -Buff - was the vehicle buffed? -Calibrated - Was the vehicle properly calibrated? Were all the ADAS calibrated as recommended by the OEM? -Cavity Wax - was cavity wax sprayed / injected? -DE-NIB - was the vehicle de-nibbed? -Emblems / Nameplates - was it installed correctly? is it aligned? is it peeling? -Gaps - Are the gaps in spec? -Hardware - is it the correct hardware? Is it the same hardware or mixed and matched -Leaks - is the vehicle leaking anywhere? -Measure – is the vehicle measurements in spec? -Paint Millimeter - is the paint the correct millimeter? Is it the same throughout? -Procedures - were procedures researched, applied, documented, and followed? -OEM Parts - were OEM Parts used? -Overspray - was the vehicle covered for overspray? Does overspray exist on the vehicle -Rust -Scan - was the vehicle scanned? did it leave with codes cleared / no DTC’s? -Scope the Damage out - inspect in between parts / panels and see if foam, cavity wax, burn marks, etc, -Swirl Marks -Tape Lines -Welds - Was the part/vehicle properly welded? Was it welded in the correct location? Are there burn marks? Was the welds destructively tested? -Wheel Alignment - was the vehicle aligned? Is it in spec? -Wheel Torque- Was the wheel torqued to the correct Nm / Lb-ft? Sheet Molded Compound (SMC)/Carbon Fiber/Fiber Glass Operation Category When it comes to repairing this type of material, please note that it does require time for it to dry properly. Small physical damage could actually take a lot longer due to the drying cycle. Here are a few steps and product when it comes to repairing: -1) Resin – Fibre Glast Epoxy Resin &amp; Epoxy Cure -2) Fiber glass – Fiberglass Mat (in a white bag, red letters) -3) Gorilla hair – Evercoat Fibertech 100633 – Reinforced Repair Compound Filler -4) Filler – Dyantron Fiberglass Filler -5) Primer (25% repair unit– as refinish unit) And treat this part the same as you would on other parts. -Stage and Secure Carbon Fiber Molding for Refinish -DE-NIB -Wet/Dry Sand, Rub-Out and Buff SRS Inspections Required After A Collision Remove people names, remove OEM names. Relocate to your own notes? Keep this general? Cleanup the next SRS lines -Audi – find on General Information Body Repair, Body Collision Repair -&gt; Damage, Evaluating -When repairing vehicles involved in collisions, damage to the body or suspension is not discovered. In some cases, this may cause serious subsequent damage later. In accidents that indicate a heavy load on the vehicle, the following components must be checked – regardless of whether or not the axles were already checked: -Check steering and steering linkages using steering wheel angle for problem-free function, visual inspection for bends or cracks -Check suspension, all suspension parts such as control arm, suspension struts, steering knuckle, stabilizer bar, subframe, axle beam and their fasteners for bends or cracks -Check rims and tires for damage, run-out and imbalance. Check tires for cuts in the tread and the sides and check the tire pressure -Check mounts for engine, transmission, axles and exhaust system for damage -Finally, a proper test drive after repairs ensures that the vehicle is safe to drive and can be handed over to the customer -Overall steering column measure – 1.0 mechanical -Need a compressor to measure -Need to measure new steering column – do it, don’t write for it -Safety inspections – 4.0 mechanical (average time amongst alpha shops) -Honda – Ed May from Honda – Only inspect if deployed, has code, or is damaged -Nissan – send photos thru I-Car for safety inspections -Porsche – If passengers felt an impact, replace steering column. -Subaru – If damage is beyond outer body cosmetic distortion, thus requires the inspection locations after a collision to be performed -State Farm does not pay for this, build it into the estimate. -Toyota – if structural damage or airbags / seatbelt / SRS deployment -Rear seatback inspection SRS Operation Category Check OEM Guidelines / Procedures in regards to SRS Inspections required after a collision and check OEM Guidelines / Procedures if SRS (seatbelt, airbag, etc) deployed to know what else to replace, inspect, program, check for. Cleanup description -Access to Airbags/Seatbelts/Sensors– R&amp;I parts for access -Airbag Residue Cleanup – 1-2 body -+ --Notes from 28434 – 2008 Jeep Wrangler Alldata procedure 11/19/2021 -Following a Supplemental Restraint System (SRS) component deployment, the vehicle interior will contain a powdery residue. This residue consists primarily of harmless particulate by-products of the small pyrotechnic charge that initiates the propellant used to deploy a SRS component. However, this residue may also contain traces of sodium hydroxide powder, a chemical by-product of the propellant material that is used to generate the inert gas that inflates the airbag. Since sodium hydroxide powder can irritate the skin, eyes, nose, or throat, be certain to wear safety glasses, rubber gloves, and a long-sleeved shirt during cleanup. 1. Begin the cleanup by using a vacuum cleaner to remove any residual powder from the vehicle interior. Clean from outside the vehicle and work your way inside, so that you avoid kneeling or sitting on a non-cleaned area. 2. Be certain to vacuum the heater and air conditioning outlets as well. Run the heater and air conditioner blower on the lowest speed setting and vacuum any powder expelled from the outlets. CAUTION: Deployed front airbags having two initiators (squibs) in the airbag inflator may or may not have live pyrotechnic material within the inflator. Do not dispose of these airbags unless you are certain of complete deployment. Refer to AIRBAG SQUIB STATUS. All damaged, ineffective, or non-deployed Supplemental Restraint System (SRS) components which are replaced on vehicles are to be handled and disposed of properly. If an airbag or seat belt tensioner unit is ineffective or damaged and non-deployed, refer to the Hazardous Substance Control System for information regarding the potentially hazardous properties of the subject component and the proper safe handling procedures. Then dispose of all non-deployed and deployed airbags and seat belt tensioners in a manner consistent with state, provincial, local and federal regulations. 3. Next, remove the deployed SRS components from the vehicle. 4. You need to vacuum the interior of the vehicle a second time to recover all of the powder. -Body Harness Wire and Connector to Airbag and Seatbelt – check to see if it melted due to deployment -Cut seatbelts to remove – 0.1 body -Diagnostic Unit – R&amp;I parts for access, R&amp;I customer belongings for console removal?, Replacement, Program / Calibrate -Impact sensor – always R&amp;I - Removed to prevent accident SRS deployment while vehicle is being worked on / transported -Lock Mode – 0.1 mechanical -31534 – 2022 Honda CRV with airbag deployment -Nissan – “recommends that all seat belt assemblies in use during a collision be replaced, unless the collision was minor and he belts show no damage and continue to operate properly” -Pyro Fuse – if SRS is deployed and vehicle is equipped with Pyrotechnic Fuse, the vehicle will become disabled. -Rivian – 2025+ is in the HV battery pack and will require to go to a service center if it doesn’t total out. Shops cannot do that -One Time Use Parts – check OEM procedures, some hardware is thread locked -Seatbelt Inspection – 1.0 M -2027 new seatbelt for rear -Volkswagen – requires 6 different -Distance and stretch -Thump Test of Seat Belt Retractors – -Seat Belt Operational Locking Check – -Static Pendulum Test of all belts – hold the seat belt in hand, tilt it and try to pull it. This is resembling when you drive on an angle and your seat belt locks in place. -Seatbelt Mounting Points - if a seatbelt is deployed, inspect the mounting points on the body. They may have been damaged. -Steering Gear -Use a force gauge to inspect – 0.2 -SRS Disable / Enable – 0.5 mechanical -SRS Disposal - $25.00 and 1.0 body - CAUTION: Deployed front airbags having two initiators (squibs) in the airbag inflator may or may not have live pyrotechnic material within the inflator. Do not dispose of these airbags unless you are certain of complete deployment. Refer to AIRBAG SQUIB STATUS. All damaged, ineffective, or non-deployed Supplemental Restraint System (SRS) components which are replaced on vehicles are to be handled and disposed of properly. If an airbag or seat belt tensioner unit is ineffective or damaged and non-deployed, refer to the Hazardous Substance Control System for information regarding the potentially hazardous properties of the subject component and the proper safe handling procedures. Then dispose of all non-deployed and deployed airbags and seat belt tensioners in a manner consistent with state, provincial, local and federal regulations. -Water Shield – if the vehicle is equipped with an Impact Sensor in the door, the water shield may have to be replaced due to a difference in air pressure once removed. -The water shield may or may not come with an adhesive to it, confirm with the OEM if the water shield will come with it. If not, it will have to be added and billed Stolen Recovery Vehicle Category Stolen Recovery Vehicles can consist of many things, ranging from scratches to dents to missing parts, it is best to review the vehicle with the vehicle owner and the insurance adjuster due to a Stolen Recovery Vehicle could have everything wrong with the vehicle as included. Stolen Recovery Vehicles take priority as it can be pretty emotional to have your vehicle stolen and invasive, some vehicle owners may have had their house broken into and keys stolen or may have been held up for their key. Vehicle Owners may also have not had their vehicle for some time due to it being stolen, then recovered, then transported, then inspected and documented, then the vehicle arrives at your facility, meanwhile the customer may have been paying for a rental during this time. The goal is to make it as smooth as possible for the vehicle owner. Here are some things to look for when reviewing and writing a vehicle that was stolen and recovered: -Biohazard Clean – 1.0 body -Check brakes – 0.3 m -Collision damage inspection– 2 hour + -Curb rash on wheels -Fingerprint powder cleanup -Floor mats – stolen? -Garage Door Opener -Gear Selector Small Cover - small part -GPS Antenna (OEM) -GPS Tracker (Theft Device) -Impound Invoice -Interior Detail - $250 -Keys stolen? – order battery, key, transmitter, recode to vehicle - recode to vehicle -Overhead Console – usually pulled down -Owner’s manual -Missing -Hardware -Parts -Panel Alignment and Gap Dimensions -Pre-Wheel Alignment -Pry Marks -Radio -Remote - for radio -Scratches -Inside Trim Panels and Seats -Outside Panels -Seatbelt Inspection -Smoking - -Ashes -Burn marks -Clean fee - for smoke and ashes -Smoking smell - $125 -Stains – included with interior detail -Test Drive – 0.5 m -Tow Bill -Underside scrapes -Wheel Lock and Wheel Lock Key -Wires - any wires ripped out / cut -Hotwired - Underneath steering wheel / dash Suspension Operation Category When it comes to suspension damage on a vehicle, it can be a bit tricky. There are many variants of suspension setups, with two main suspensions, Solid Axle or Independent Suspension. Any time a vehicle has wheel and/or tire damage, it is recommended to have a pre wheel alignment done on a vehicle. A pre wheel alignment is checking the specs of a vehicle to see if it is or is not in spec. If it is not in spec, can it be adjusted into spec? If it cannot be adjusted into spec, what parts does it need to have that vehicle back into spec? If you do not have access to a wheel alignment measurement, what should you look for when inspecting suspension damage. How are the bushings? Are the bushings torn, are the bushings tilted/angled/misaligned? How are the bolts, are the bolts misaligned? Can you see see an alignment mark from where it was originally? Does the wheel look pushed back/forward/in/out? Did the wheel in question get measured and compared to the opposite side? Another thing to take into account is if you need to remove any parts to gain access to the suspension such as Exhaust, Undershield, etc. Here are some operations to add and look for when working on suspension: -ABS Sensor – -ABS Sensor may need to be programmed to vehicle as per a 2020 Jeep Gladiator -Aftermarket Suspension- -Does customer have specific specs needed / requested? -Have customer sign a waiver stating they requested X specifications due to aftermarket suspension -Will the vehicle be calibrated properly with the aftermarket setup? -Alignments- There are four different types of alignments -Maintenance – struts, tires, worn parts -Symptom/Corrective – steering wheel off, pulls -Performance – Lowering, Raising, Customizing -Collision – damage parts, structural, calibrations, ride height -Activate Park Brake Release – 0.1 mechanical -Rivian– turns off after 15 minutes -For four wheel alignment -Add Weight for Wheel Alignment – 0.2 body -Some vehicles require weight to be placed in the vehicle while you perform the wheel alignment, such as: -Tesla Model 3 and Y - as stating in the Four Wheel Alignment procedure and on the Hunter Alignment System -Air Suspension Leveling – 0.3 mechanical -Tesla Model X -Air Suspension Depressurize / Pressurize – One Air Spring – 0.6 mechanical -Audi – Vehicle Lift Mode -Rivian 1.0 mechanical -Rivian – go to website, Tools-&gt; Diagnostic. Search Compressor and depressurize/pressurize pops up. -Rivian – use RiDE and search Compressor. Procedure code is 185420010. Discharge procedure and charge procedure. -Brakes -Bleed Brake System -Brake Fluid -Bleed the ABS pump - __ - bleeding the brakes does not include bleeding the ABS pump. The estimated work time of 0.5 hour applied to Bleed Brake System is for those situations when the Brake Hydraulic Line is open at one or all four Suspension points (caliper/wheel cylinder). Bleeding the ABS Unit was not considered in the estimated time allowance for Bleed Brake System. -Bushings - are bushings listed separately? Do they require labor unit for removal and installation? -Caliper – Occasionally, if working on the suspension, you can remove the caliper and hang it up and not have to disconnect the brake line and not have to replace brake fluid -Rivian Kinetic Suspension Evac and Fill Cart -1.0 mechanical – functions like an AC machine -Keep bumper harness plugged in otherwise ride height cant be adjusted Regarding the use of the Kinetic Suspension evac and fill cart, the current state of the Service Manual and the RiDE procedure should have all the documentation that the shop needs. RiDE Service Procedure- 187690024 - Hydraulic Fluid (Drain and Refill) - Automatic Kinetic Suspension Evacuate and Fill Machine The RiDE procedure will step them through the full process and assist you in operating the vehicle systems for the procedure. Tool Use Instruction - https://serviceinfo.goriv.co/en-us/ToolUseInstructions/NCT06050811/NCT06050811.html Details about the machine that you will not find in RiDE or the Service Manual Procedure Service Manual procedure - https://serviceinfo.goriv.co/en-us/R1T/R1T_Service_Manual/18-Suspension/1876-Hydraulic_Suspension/187690024.html Hopeful that the information in the tool use instructions and the service manual procedures are helpful enough to have your technicians confident in performing this operation. -Differential – Refer to OEM Procedure as each vehicle is built differently. Also take note on the following: -Axles -Axle Nut -Differential Fluid -Drive Shaft -Drive Shaft -Four Wheel Alignment - book labor unit -Bentley – wheel alignment cant be done here due to software -Maserati – wheel alignment cant be done here due to software / ride height How to tell what each one is -Chamber – is the one closest to the wheel. Is the fuckboy look -Caster – is the one further from the wheel. Is the position of susp. -Toe - is tie rod. Is left and right (turning the wheel) -Hub and Bearing Press together (when the parts come separate) – 0.5 mechanical -Grease - refer to OEM procedure and OEM product specifications -Power Steering Assist Check – 0.5 mechanical -Power Steering Fluid - order OEM and 0.3 mechanical -Pre-Wheel Alignment – 1.0 mechanical – Pre wheel alignment required to determine if vehicle is out of alignment. -Audi – every Audi needs pre wheel alignment -If vehicle is out of alignment, one time use hardware will be required to replace. Done before TD or during TD. Used to determine if suspension is damaged and needs replacement. -Jacking compensation – 1.2 mechanical -Pre wheel alignment done using jacking compensation. Jacking compensation lifts the vehicle into the air . Vehicle is not sitting on its wheels/tires. Used if vehicle has a flat or damaged wheel -R&amp;I 4x wheel covers for wheel alignment – -Release/Engage Parking Brake – 0.3 Mechanical -Ride Height - -Measure and Calibrate Ride Height - 1.0 mechanical -Measure Ride Height - 0.5 mechanical -Measure Ride Height Pre and Post Part Replacement - 1.0 mechanical -Ride Height Adjustment - 0.5 mechanical -Ride Height Calibration - 0.5 mechanical -Ride Height Mode - 0.1 mechanical -Rivian -Road Test Vehicle – also referred to as Dynamic Systems Verification for 1.0 mechanical -Shock Disposal / Strut Disposal - $5.00 and 0.2 mechanical -Shock/Strut must have the gas discharged. Methods can be the following: -Drill a hole -Use a hacksaw and make a hole -31340 – 2024 Lexus RX 350 – place the front shock absorber horizontally with the piston rod extended, and using a hacksaw, make a hole between (A) and (B) shown in the illustration to discharge the gas inside -31333 – 2022 Chevy Camaro – make an indentation 10mm (0.4 inch) from the bottom of the tube using a centerpunch. Clamp. Drill a hole in the shock absorber at the centerpunch using a 5mm ( 3/16 in) drill bit. Gas or a gas/oil mixture will exhaust when the drill bit penetrates the shock absorber. Drill a second hole, etc, etc. -Spring Compressor – to remove sprin g from vehicle – 0.5 mechanical (per spring) -Steering Angle Sensor – 1.0 unit mechanical, -Refer to OEM Procedure for calibrating the steering angle sensor during a wheel alignment -Steering Gear – check procedures, and such -Refer to OEM Position Statement on Steering Gear Damage and Inspection. -Replace steering gear after any damage to the front suspension per OEM guidelines / Position statements. Typically Electronic Steering Gear must be replaced if Front Suspension is damaged. -Does the Steering Gear need to be programmed? -Steering Column bolt to Steering gear – replace -Steering Gear Force Gauge – 0.2 M - Measure / inspect / test -Steering Wheel Lock – 0.1 M (not included with four wheel alignment) -Use a digital inclinometer tool or leveler -Subframe Fixture – 0.2 mechanical - Used to lower and raise subframe from vehicle -Suspension Check – Retorque – 0.3M -Suspension replacement – mark the suspension with a marker once you tighten everything so you could see if it was moved. -Tie Rod - when outer tie rod nut -Tip on replacing tie rods -Check the measurement of the original tie rod and use that measurement to help install the replacement tie rod. Then when you do the wheel alignment, you may only need to adjust it slightly as you are using pre loss specs -Tire Change Mode – 0.1 mechanical -Rivian – need to put vehicle into Tire Change Mode as per online class ‘Collision/Service: Rivian R1T Wheel Alignment -Tooling - is the vehicle requiring any specific tooling that you do not have at your facility? Perhaps it is requiring a specific socket for that particular vehicle -Tow Mode -Replacing Rear Knuckle on Tesla Model Y -Wheel Alignment Mode – 0.1 mechanical -EV Hummer Total Loss Charges Category When a vehicle becomes a Total Loss, that does not mean the vehicle has become a loss at your facility. For a vehicle to become a total loss at your facility, there are operations you as a shop have done for the vehicle status to get to that point. Here are some operations you can bill out (as long as they apply to the work done): Before you send over any Total Loss Charges to the insurance company, the customer has to accept the offer from insurance. If customer is unhappy with the offer from insurance, the customer can reach out to a company that will help get them a different valuation such as Vehicle Value Experts -ADAS Diagnostic Report - $25.00 -Administration Fee - $300 – To create the work file for CCC, Shopman, check the car in, receive information, etc -Assist customer with belongings – 1.0 hour body. -Bags and Totes $$ -If bags and totes were given to vehicle owner as assistance and good faith, charge them out -Blueprint Fee – 10% of overall estimate -Blueprint Fee is if the vehicle was completely disassembled for repair and a completed estimate / supplement was written and then after the vehicle was deemed a total loss -Collision Damage Inspection – 1.0 body unit -Collision Wrapped -Color Check -Cover and Protect Electrical Connections - $5.00 and 0.3 body unit -Cover Steering Wheel, Floor Mat, Seat Cover – $ 5.00 &amp; 0.2 body unit -Seat cover – 0.1 – non-disposable -Delete Customer Information – 1.0 –2.0 body unit -customer address, saved locations, phone numbers, etc -Every vehicle is different and we have to learn what options and which systems this vehicle has and then see what the customer has programmed in and learn to clear it. -Disassembly Labor Units - how many units does your technician have into it? If the technician has 10.00 into the vehicle, that is 10.00 units away from another vehicle -Estimate Documentation - $50.00 -EV Battery - https://www.instagram.com/reel/CwX7seaICpa/?igshid=MzRlODBiNWFlZA%3D%3D Interesting how they do this. -Glass cleanup - 1-2 body units -Hazardous Waste Removal - $7.50 -Such as leaking fluids or material that was removed from the vehicle that won't be going back with the vehicle as a total loss -Parts Handling Fee –$20.00 &amp; 2.0 body unit +/- - - Includes wrapping, storing, labeling, organizing, retrieving and delivering -Damaged Parts -R&amp;I Parts -Parts Restocking Fee - $___ different for every job -Pullout Fee – 1.0-hour body – Pulling vehicle out, removing all of your facilities information (estimate, window tag, work order, etc.) and taking the vehicle to the tow truck -Reinstall Parts - -Depending on the condition, parts can be reinstalled for a variety of reasons, reasons can be: -To make it easier for the vehicle to be picked up and transported to a yard -If the customer is buying the vehicle back or removing it from your facility to go else where -Have vehicle owner sign a waiver -The Labor unit will vary on reinstalling parts due to: -Condition of the damages. How damaged are they? Will you need extra labor unit in installing a damaged part? -Spray Out Cards -Storage – from the day the vehicle arrives to the day the vehicle leaves -$150/day outside -$200/day upstairs -$550/day inside -Tote / Part Box - $$ / preservation fee -Tow in and out of yard - $75/each – need tow bill -Tow off and on tow truck with forklift - $250/each – need tow bill -Yard Fee - $150 – To clear the area and have the vehicle occupy a spot Vehicle Modification Operation Category Before you do all your research, please get an answer on these -Does the vehicle owner have the coverage for modifications on their policy? -Does the vehicle owner have the original receipt for the modification part and the original receipt for the install? -Accessory Switch -Aftermarket Research - $50+- and 1.0+- body -Bags - suspension -Bug Deflector -Bull Bar -Bumper Guard -Ceramic Coating -Removal – 1.0 body per panel -Application - $200 per panel -Cross Bars on Roof -Dash Cam - front, front and rear -Door Edge Guard -OEM – usually metal -Aftermarket – usually a flexible/bendy part -$15.00 and 0.3 body -$ and Labor unit -Adhesive cleanup -Exhaust System -Handle Sill Protector -Hitch -Does the vehicle require a cutout on the bumper for the hitch -Hitch accessory -License Plate Bracket -Light Bar -PPF / Clear Bra -Once lamps (foglamps, headlamps, taillamps) are PPF’d, they cannot be undone as it risks delaminating -PPF Removal and Adhesive Residue Cleanup-1.0 - 2.0 body -PPF Application – Price varies -Pinstripe Painted or Taped – -Cleanup Taped Pinstripe / Removal– 0.3 body per -Painted –1 hour refinish each panel -Prep for panel/vehicle for second color (time to mask, time to color tint, spray out card, time to swap out for second paint) -Taped –$25 and 0.3 body each panel test -For dual pinstripes – double the $amount and labor unit -Radar Detector -Roll Bar -Sill Protectors -Step Pad Accessory -Stereo System -Suspension -Specific specifications as per customer / suspension? -Tonneau Cover -Tow Hooks -Wheels - -Specific torque spec as per customer / wheel &amp; lug nut manufacturer? -Window Tint -Window Visor -Vinyl Wrap - Check wait time with paint manufacturer before applying -Vinyl Wrap Removal and Adhesive Residue Cleanup-1.0 - 2.0 body -Vinyl Wrap Application – Price varies Wheel and Tire Operation Category -When it comes to ordering tires, please check the Expiration Date on Tires – all tires must have DOT stamp on it and then if you go to the right of it, it should have numbers in an oval / (2514) example. This means this tire was made in the 25 th week of 2014. Most tires expire in 6-10 years. This number is only on one side of the tire. https://www.instagram.com/reel/Cy6yqQcvXvS/?igsh=MWVhbW1xdHl4aHhqaQ== -Bring Tire(s) to Mounting Temperature – 0.1 m -Audi Position Statement / Procedure – 5.6 Tires, Bringing to Mounting Temperature -Center Cap Emblem – does the center cap emblem point to the TPMS / Valve stem? -Porsche - https://www.instagram.com/reel/C0FodZgPZXo/?igshid=NTYzOWQzNmJjMA== -Jack stand– 0.1 body -Lug nut covers – 0.1 body -Machined Style Wheel – Must replace -Two toned, machined wheel. -Deep scratches through machined portion. -Scratches through painted black portion. -Cannot repair machined style wheels. -Repairs to machined wheels consist of shaving the surface down to rid the damage. -Example of a machined wheel listed below at the bottom of this category -Pre-Balance and Dismount – 0.3 mechanical -add more note to this? Are you re-balancing it and re-mounting it? - Pre-balance and Dismount to determine if wheel can be used with new tire.Found wheel is bent and unable to balance. -Check Balance – balancing wheel/tire as is – 0.3 mechanical -Add notes – found wheel to be balanced or wheel cannot be balanced. -Remove locking lug nut – 0.2 mechanical -Spare Wheel -If the vehicle has a spare tire mounted on the backside of the vehicle (not underside) and the vehicle was involved in a rear end hit, Check and see if the spare wheel is balanced, or if its damaged. -If the vehicle was driven on a spare wheel, does the wheel state how long it can be driven on? Example if the wheel states it can only be driven for 25 miles and the vehicle owner drove 50 miles, that will require replacement -Tire Disposal - $5.00 (non-taxed) sublet – per tire -Tire Mount and Balance – -$20 High Point / Plymouth Rock -0.5 mechanical for Non-DRP - Tire Mounting Paste - $2.00 - total for all wheels/tires -Tire Repair Kit - $ and labor unit -Tire Replacement – use DEG link that you saved and look up the owner’s manual regarding when to replace all four or two tire’s to match the opposite side on the same axle https://degweb.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Manufacture-owners-support-weblinks.pdf -Tire Tax - $1.50 (non-taxed) sublet – per tire -Tire Valve Stem - __ different for every vehicle -Torque Wheel(s) ( __ Nm / __ Lbs-ft) – 0.2 mechanical per wheel -TPMS Sensor / Valve Stem – does this part require replacement -TPMS Sensor Disposal - $5.00 and 0.2 mechanical -Remove battery, remove urethane, cut battery terminal -31340 – 2024 Lexus RX 350 - dispose of tire pressure warning valve and transmitter. Remove the urethane that protects the lithium battery and the circuit board. Cut the 2 terminals to remove the lithium battery from the tire pressure warning valve and transmitter -TPMS Sensor Recalibration - $75 or 1.0 mechanical – refer to OEM procedure -Tesla – use own calibration labor unit -31410 – 2017 Toyota Rav4 – same thing as above -31430 – 2018 Nissan Altima – remove battery, remove urethane, cut battery terminal, -Universal spare wheel – 0.2 mechanical -If the vehicle does not have a spare wheel, a universal spare wheel will be installed if the vehicle has a flat tire or if the wheel is being sent out for repair and you want to keep the vehicle mobile -Wheel Repairs - refer to OEM Position Statement on what is allowed for a wheel repair. Some manufacturers state you can not remove or add material and you can only repair a cosmetic scratch through the clear coat. -Does the wheel have a label on it that can be replaced or re-created? Some vehicle manufacturers do not sell the label, therefore, you cannot correct repair that wheel to pre-loss condition. Example of a label on a wheel listed below at the bottom of this category Wheel Weights – $5.00 - per wheel Label on a wheel Audi (wheel is also machined) Rivian Machined wheel of a Hummer EV “ Estimating Tip: CCC, Mitchell and Audatex – TPMS Sensors (Tire Pressure Monitoring System) When wheels need to be replaced, it is important to follow the OEM Repair procedure and protocol when dealing with valve stems and TPMS Sensors. Many OEM may require the TPMS Sensor be rebuilt using a “parts kit” Anytime the sensor nut is loosened or the tire is replaced. Rebuilding TPMS Sensors is NOT INCLUDED as well as the cost of the repair kit. CCC/Motors GTE Guide States that TPMS Sensor labor is INCLUDED when replacing a wheel. Rebuilding a TPMS Sensor is NOT INCLUDED. Refer to inquiry 12423 Mitchell: CEG Guide under wheels: TPMS Sensor R/I or R/R is NOT INCLUDED in the wheel replacement labor time Audatex: Labor report may include the TPMS Sensor labor as INCLUDED when replacing a wheel. Rebuilding a TPMS Sensor is NOT INCLUDED unless specifically stated in the labor report. Additionally: Electronic reset or programming of the TPMS System is NOT INCLUDED and will require an on the spot evaluation. SCRS also offers a TPMS Relearn Chart to serve as a quick reference for technicians working on TPMS equipped vehicles. The chart can be found at https://scrs.com/product/tpms-relearn-chart ” Training Classes – written out ADAS Operation and Service (1/5) Lighting and Vision Assist -Adaptive Lighting Systems – -Adaptive lighting is designed to create better visibility during night driving by automatically optimizing the light on the road ahead. Features of an adaptive lighting system (ALS) may include the ability of the headlamps to: -Turn in the direction of travel -Automatically level -Automatically switch between high and low beam -Dim or turn off select high beam lights -Vehicle makers have different names for ALS such as adaptive driving beam, adaptive front lighting system, or intelligent light system -Adaptive Lighting System Operation and Parts -The ALS works by receiving input from various sensors and modules. Input data may be processed directly by the ALS control module or the data may first go to other control modules such as the : -Engine control module -Transmission control module -Electronic brake control module -Body control module -Adaptive front lighting parts include: -Swiveling and leveling actuators -Control modules -Sensors, such as the steering wheel angle sensor, vehicle speed sensor, and vehicle ride height sensors -Adaptive Driving Beam Headlamps – adaptive headlamps turn to follow curves in the road and to better illuminate the roadway ahead for the driver. These headlamps can have incandescent halogen, high-intensity discharge (HID), or light-emitting diode (LED) bulbs. They have fail-safe features that return the headlamps to the straight-ahead and low-beam positions in the event of a communication error with system inputs. Adaptive front lighting systems generally do not operate with the transmission in reverse or at speeds less than 2 mph or (3.2 km/h). Movement of the headlamps may be limited at low vehicle speeds, and full movement of the lamps may not be allowed until a certain speed is attained. The steering angle sensor is the primary input for adaptive headlamps -Auto-Leveling Headlamps and Leveling Sensors – the ride height sensors are the primary input for the auto-leveling headlamps. Vehicle speed, acceleration, and braking data is also used to determine the correct level for the headlamps. This allows the headlamps to retain at the optimal position as the vehicle ride height changes due to braking, acceleration, or heavy loads. There can be up to four ride height sensors on a vehicle. Each system is unique. Some use a single ride height sensor mounted in the rear while others may use two or more located in the front and rear. The sensors are typically located on suspension points near the wheel. Calibration is typically required if a leveling sensor is removed or replaced. -High Beam Assist- the high beam-assist system turns the high beams on and off based on information from a front facing camera that detects color, intensity, and movement of light. This system ensures the best headlamp setting to illuminate the road ahead regardless of whether you are driving on a highway, a country road, or in the city. The high beam-assist system monitors approaching vehicle headlamps to turn off the high beams. It also monitors other light sources, like tail lamps of another vehicle, to determine if the high beams should be turned off. -Front Facing Camera – the front facing camera is typically found near the rearview mirror. It detects ambient light and light from vehicles ahead to determine the activation and deactivation of the high beams. Like other cameras, the lens needs to be kept clean to function properly. It is also important the windshield is clean and defect-free for the camera to work properly. Calibration may be required if the front facing camera or the windshield are removed or replaced. -Steering Wheel Sensor – used for various advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS), the steering angle sensor (SAS) helps determine the angle of the headlamps when the steering wheel is turned. The SAS may be part of the steering column clock-spring assembly, located along the steering shaft or use data from the electronic power assist steering (EPAS) motor position sensor to determine how many degrees the steering wheel is turned. The SAS may require calibration if it is removed or replace, if a wheel alignment is performed, or a diagnostic trouble code (DTC) indicates calibration is required -Night Vision – -Night vision systems extend the perception of the driver beyond the reach of the headlamps. Night vision works by using a thermal imaging camera to detect infrared (IR) light. It is typically located low in the front bumper or grille. This makes the camera and its mounting brackets particularly susceptible to front-end collision damage. night vision assist systems are broken into two types: -Active, which uses near-IR imaging -Passive, which uses thermal or far-IR imaging -Most systems use passive night vision, although some systems may use both -Active Night Vision and Infrared Illumination – active night vision systems detect near-IR, which falls outside the visible spectrum of light. Because near-IR light does not contain any heat, an active night vision system must use IR flood lamps on the vehicle to illuminate the darkness for the camera. An IR camera can see this light and displays the image on screen. The visible range for active night vision is about 600’ (183m) but may vary depending on the vehicle system configuration. Active systems provide a sharper image than passive night vision systems but are not as effective in rainy or foggy conditions -Passive Night Vision – passive night vision systems do not use an IR light source to illuminate the road but instead capture the thermal radiation given off by objects. All objects emit thermal, or far-IR light waves, which is father from the visible light spectrum than near-IR. Because IR light is emitted from the source, the range for passive IR is greater than that of active IR, typically about 1,000’ (300m). Rain and fog have much less impact on a passive system. These systems don’t produce as sharp of an image as active systems -Night Vision Display Options- -Depending on the specific vehicle, the night vision display may be on the: -Head-up display -Infotainment screen -Driver information center -In some systems, the image can be viewed on multiple displays at the same time, such as a dedicated screen and the head-up display. Although some systems may add color to highlight objects for greater visibility, most images are displayed in black and white. Some systems provide additional alerts if a pedestrian is detected ADAS Operation and Service (2/5) Braking, Steering, and Collision Assist -Advanced Brake Systems- -Advanced brake systems use control modules and sophisticated software to provide braking features beyond anti-lock braking systems (ABS). many of these systems rely on the ABS for operation and include: -Hill start and hill descent control -Automatic brake hold -Some advanced brake systems work in harmony with ADAS systems to provide a safer driving experience. Advanced braking systems that are partnered with ADAS includes emergency braking assist and automatic emergency braking. -Hybrid and electric vehicles (EV) also have advanced braking unique to them, including: -Regenerative braking -One-pedal driving -Regenerative Braking – hybrid and EVs use regenerative braking to help recharge the batteries during driving. Electric motors are used to slow the vehicle and generate electricity to charge the batteries simultaneously. To maximize efficiency, regenerative braking is used as much as possible, but friction braking is still needed for faster stopping as well as ABS, traction control, stability control, and other emergency braking systems -One-Pedal Driving – one-pedal driving allows drivers of hybrid and EVs the ability to accelerate and stop their vehicle by using only one pedal. This is made possible by regenerative braking. The magnetic resistance of the electric motor can slow the vehicle to a full stop. When one-pedal driving is active, the brake lights function just as if you were pressing the brake pedal. One-pedal driving is a way to maximize EV range by regeneration the most electricity possible while driving. It also reduces wear on the conventional brake system parts. One-pedal driving is not good for emergency stops, which still require a hydraulic brake system -Hill Start – like one-pedal driving, hill start ensures a vehicle stays stopped until the accelerator is engaged. Hill start systems use data from sensors to determine if the vehicle is on an include while stopped. The ABS holds the vehicle in position long enough for the driver to take their foot off the brake and move it to the accelerator pedal. This is especially helpful on a manual transmission vehicle to prevent rolling backwards before the clutch engages -Hill Descent Control – hill descent control regulates vehicle speed to maintain a slow, safe, controlled descent when driving downhill. When the system is active, it works by using the ABS to maintain a speed set by the driver. The speed at which the system works varies by make and model. This information can usually be found in the service information under the ABS description and operation -Automatic Brake Hold – the automatic brake hold system holds the vehicle in position using the ABS until the accelerator is depressed. This allows the driver to maintain their position in stopped traffic without having to keep their foot on the brake. This is especially helpful in stop-and-go traffic because it helps to avoid fatigue. Some systems will automatically set the electronic parking brake if automatic brake hold is active for longer than a set length of time -Advanced Brake System Parts – advanced brake system parts may include: -The ABS -Wheel speed sensors -Inclination sensors, accelerometers, and other sensors that may be part of a module such as the restraints control module -Electric drive motors on hybrids and EVs -Additional control modules, electric park brake actuators, and sensors -Lane Departure Warning System – the lane departure warning system helps the driver keep the vehicle in a chosen lane. The system uses audio, visual, or steering wheel vibrations to warn the driver that the vehicle is drifting out of the lane, allowing the driver to correct the position of the vehicle. Lane departure warning assist systems typically operate at speeds of 35 mph (56 km/h) or above, depending on the vehicle maker -Lane Keep Assist System – lane keep assist systems monitor the position of the vehicle in the lane and take corrective action to help keep the vehicle there. This type of system can apply steering torque using the EPAS. Both lane keep assist and lane departure warning systems use the front facing camera or cameras mounted to the windshield to watch the lane markings on the road. Good lane markings are required for the system to operate. Many systems have a display on the instrument panel which shows the lane markings visible to the camera and if the vehicle is drifting out of the lane. The system is temporarily deactivated if the turn signal is used to allow a lane change without prompting an alert -Traffic Sign Recognition – traffic sign recognition systems use a front facing camera to locate road signs and display them on a screen. The camera used for sign recognition may be dedicated to the system, or it may use a camera from another ADAS system. This system is intended to assist the driver in following posted road sign instructions and regulations. For example, a vehicle may use a vibration or audible warning if it is not following the posted speed limit. The system may also save recognized signs to more easily identify them in the future. Always look at service information to verify the system parts and servicing requirements -Auto Speed Limit – auto speed limit, also called intelligent speed assist, helps the vehicle maintain a safe, legal speed. If the speed limit is exceed, the driver is alerted so they can reduce the speed. Systems may have user settings that allow the vehicle to automatically change the speed to match the posted limit. This feature uses traffic sign recognition features and may use GPS system to calculate legal speed limits. It is tied into the adaptive cruise control system to help regulate vehicle speed. -Lane Departure Warning and Lane Keep Assist System parts – the primary parts of the lane departure warning and lane keep assist may include a: -Camera, typically located behind the windshield near the rearview mirror -Control module -Lane departure warning ON/OFF switch -Vibrator motor, if equipped -Drive information center -Audio system for audible warning notification -EPAS -Steering torque sensor -Collision Avoidance Systems – collision avoidance systems are designed to predict a collision by using the front facing camera as well as the front radar module, if equipped. Some systems may function using only radar. The system monitors traffic to help prevent or minimize the severity of a collision. The system determines the distance between vehicles and how fast that distance is closing. It will forewarn the driver through audio or visual signals. The warning prompts the driver to either slow down or take evasive maneuvers. If a warning is given and the actions taken by the driver are not evasive enough, these systems can step in and help by applying braking and steering -Collision Avoidance Brake Assist Systems -Collision avoidance can engage the brakes without driver input to prevent a crash or lessen the impact of a crash. It includes: -Emergency braking assist -Automatic emergency braking (AEB) -Many modules and communication networks work together with these advanced systems, but they still rely on the base ABS to work. If the sensors or cameras used in collision avoidance systems are unbolted or moved, the corresponding system will most likely require calibration. Always check vehicle-maker service information to verify if calibration is required while servicing a vehicle. -Emergency Braking Assist – emergency braking assist can apply the brakes at full force if needed. A brake pedal position sensor is used to calculate how forcefully a driver is applying the brakes. It can send a command to the ABS to apply full stopping force move quickly, and with more pressure, than the driver might be able to generate on their own -Automatic Emergency Braking – AEB automatically applies the brake without driver intervention to avoid collisions. AEB sensors may include radar, laser, or camera systems, or a combination of technologies, to monitor activity in front of or behind the vehicle. Ultrasonic-based parking sensors in the bumper covers may also be used for low-speed AEB -Evasive Steering Assist – some vehicles offer evasive steering assist, which works with the emergency braking assist system. By using radar sensors and cameras, the system can detect a slow moving or stationary obstacle. It can help steer around these to avoid a collision. Typically, an audible warning or a visual display warning alerts the driver. If no action is taken, the emergency brake assist system will activate. If a driver then chooses to use evasive driving to avoid a collision, evasive steering assist provides the amount of steering torque needed -Collision Avoidance System Parts -Depending on the system options, the collision avoidance system uses: -Radar sensors -Front facing cameras -Control modules -A front millimeter-wave radar sensor is used to detect vehicles and obstacles on the road ahead. Some vehicles use additional medium-range radar modules to expand the field of view of the collision avoidance system. These are typically located behind the front bumper cover at the front corners of the vehicle -Attention Alert Systems – attention alert systems use many sensor inputs, such as the steering angle sensor and the steering torque sensor. These are used to monitor driver behavior patterns which are assessed in real-time. If the system detects abnormal behavior, it will alert the driver and suggest a pause from driving. These systems may also monitor: -Continuous drive time -If a driver’s hands are on the wheel -The driver’s concentration level or drowsiness -Some vehicles will slow to an automatic emergency stop if the alert fail to correct the driver’s behavior -Attention Alert Parts – attention alert system parts may include the: -Driver-facing cameras -Steering torque sensor -Steering angle sensor -Drive time monitor -Driver information center -Speakers for audible alerts ADAS Operation and Service (3/5) Parking Assist -Parking Assist – parking assist has progressed to the point where most vehicle makers offer the system as an option or standard equipment on their new models. There are two types of parking assist. These include: -Assist only, where the system provides visual and audio feedback to help determine the distance to obstacles -Hands-free or active parking assist -Parking Assist Operation – with a parking assist system, the driver maintains complete control of the vehicle. This system works at low speeds, typically around 11 mph (18 km/h) or less. These systems typically use cameras to provide the driver with a real-time view of the bumper and nearby objects. Distance sensors provide audible signals as the vehicle approaches an object. Some models provide braking assist to help avoid a collision. Some systems work both in REVERSE and in DRIVE. Many systems engage when they detect an object about 8’ (2.4m) from the vehicle. This feature can usually be switched ON or OFF on the instrument panel. -Active Parking Assist – some systems have been designed to automatically parallel or perpendicular park the vehicle into an open parking space. These systems may also be able to pull the car out of the parking space. Once a parking space is confirmed, the driver may only need to apply the brakes and shift the transmission. The vehicle performs the steering, using the parking sensors for guidance. Other parking assist systems can drive the vehicle into or out of a parking stall using a function on the remote, without a driver inside the vehicle. This is helpful for tight parking situations where it may be difficult to open a door to get in or out -Ultrasonic Sensors – parking assist sensors are designed to calculate the distance to an object. These are typically ultrasonic sensors, which emit sound waves to measure the distance from an object. These sensors are effective for short-distance object detection and are mounted across the front and rear bumpers and occasionally on the sides of the vehicle. In addition to audible alerts, most vehicles have a display that shows where objects are being detected and how far away they area. There is a quick check that can be done if a sensor is suspected of not working. You can hear a working sensor ticking if you use a mechanic’s stethoscope, or a piece of tubing between the sensor and your ear. -Parking Assist Cameras – rearview cameras are mounted on the deck lid, rear gate, or bumper of the vehicle to provide a view of the rear bumper area. These may be built into the emblem or the rear gate handle. Front-view cameras are often mounted in the grille to provide a view of the front bumper area. Images are displayed on the infotainment screen and may have active guidelines that move with the steering to show the projected path of the vehicle -Surround-View Cameras - -Surround-view cameras, also called 360 degree view cameras, use a system of cameras to view the entire area immediately around the vehicle. These cameras may also be shared with parking assist and other ADAS features. While the location of these cameras vary, they generally are located: -In the front bumper or grille -On the door mirrors -On the rear gate, deck lid, or rear bumper -More advanced surround-view camera systems may include a camera on each end of the front bumper cover for cross-traffic view, or multiple cameras for the rear view ADAS Operation and Service (4/5) Radar-Based Systems -Adaptive Cruise Control – the adaptive cruise control (ACC) is an extension of conventional cruise control systems. The ACC system automatically maintains a set distance from a vehicle ahead. However, it is not a fully autonomous driving system. Parts of the ACC system may be integrated into the collision avoidance systems. The ACC also enhances driver convenience by accelerating and braking without driver intervention. As with conventional cruise control systems, manual inputs from the driver, both to the accelerator and brake, take priority over the ACC system -ACC Operation – the radar-based ACC distance sensor uses a radar module located on the front of the vehicle that detects the presence of a vehicle ahead as well as the distance from that vehicle. Radar sensors may be exposed or behind the front bumper or grille. There are some systems that combine their radar and forward-facing camera to improve the accuracy of ACC. Some vehicles use only their front facing cameras for ACC&gt; these systems typically use dual cameras using two images to calculate the distance to the leading vehicle. These types of ACC systems usually do not have a front radar module -ACC LiDAR Systems – some vehicles are using LiDAR instead of a radar module to detect and calculate the distance of an object or vehicle ahead. Instead of using reflected radio waves like a radar, LiDAR uses the reflected light of an invisible laser to calculate the distance to the vehicle ahead. LiDAR sensors are less common and may be exposed on the bumper, grille, or behind the windshield. like radar ACC, some systems may use LiDAR combined with input from a front facing camera to improve system accuracy. -ACC Control Modules – the control modules include the ACC module in addition to the ABS and powertrain control module (PCM). The primary function of the ACC module is to process the radar information and determine if a forward vehicle is present. When the ACC system is engaged, the system sends information to the PCM and ABS module to control the distance between the ACC vehicle and the target vehicle. It accomplishes this by varying the throttle position and applying the brakes if necessary. -Hands-Free Driving – while fully autonomous vehicles are not yet available, manufacturers continue to add features that get a littler closer each year. Some vehicle makers offer hands-free steering, but this feature only works on roads that meet certain requirements to operate safely. Drivers are still required to keep their eyes on the road which is verified by driver-facing cameras -Blind Spot Detection – the blind spot detection system calculates if a warning should be issued when an approaching vehicle enters the blind spot area. The indicator will illuminate sooner if the approaching vehicle is traveling at a high rate of speed. Another advanced system incorporates collision-avoidance with the blind spot system. In addition to other blind spot alerts, these systems apply braking force if a vehicle is detected in the blind spot while the driver attempts to change lanes. Some vehicle systems apply corrective steering torque using their EPAS. -Blind Spot Detection Radar Sensors and Parts – most vehicles use radar sensors for blind spot detection. Some vehicles use both cameras and radar for their blind spot systems. The cameras, usually mounted in the door mirrors, may be used by multiple driver-assist systems in addition to blind spot detection. Blind spot detection system parts include radar sensors, which are generally located behind the rear bumper cover or taillamps, on each side. A control module calculates speed, object position, and vehicle tracking. On systems with cameras, when the turn signal is switched on, the feed from the blind spot camera will be displayed for the driver -Warning Indicators – along with a visual alert on the door mirror, there may be an audible warning and a message in the instrument panel to indicate an approaching vehicle. In some cases, the indicator lamp will glow continuously when a vehicle is in the blind spot sensor field of view. It may flash if the turn signal is activated. On some systems, the steering wheel vibrates when vehicles are detected in the blind spot -Cross-Traffic Alert – cross-traffic alert (CTA) systems assist the driver with oncoming traffic from the sides. The blind spot radar is used to detect approaching vehicles in the rear. Front CTA systems use radar modules or cameras located at the outer front corners of the vehicle. When the system detects an approaching vehicle, it warns the driver with an audible and visual alert. Visual alerts may be found on the door mirrors, the driver infotainment center, or infotainment screen. Some vehicles may also indicate the direction of the oncoming traffic. Some systems also use AEB along with CTA to automatically apply the brakes if the system determines an impact is imminent ADAS Operation and Service (4/5) Service Considerations for ADAS -Control Modules – ADAS features require many systems to work together. DTCs, along with service information, will guide you in starting the diagnosis. Be sure to reference the description and operation of the system to understand which modules may be affected. A DTC in one module may set multiple DTCs in other systems. If a module requires replacement, it will likely need to be programmed or initialized for the specific vehicle. Additionally, information may need to be downloaded from the original module to use in the new one -Calibrations – calibrations are not only required when a part is replaced or removed. There are other operations which may require calibration, such as removing or replacing an adjacent part. Its critical to reference the most current vehicle-maker service information for any system being serviced. ADAS parts and systems that may require calibrations include, but are not limited to the: -ACC -Lane departure system -Surround view system -Blind spot alert -Night vision system -Cameras -Radar sensors -Headlamps -Steering angle sensor -Ride height sensors -Active guidelines -Parking Assist Sensor Service – parking assist and active parking assist rely on the correct operation of the ultrasonic sensors. Sensors must be clean; mud, snow, ice, or dirt can impar sensor function. These sensors must also be fully seated in their mounts and pointed in the correct direction. Service information may require monitoring sensor parameter identification (PID) data while the vehicle is in DRIVE or REVERse to watch for abnormal data. Another check may also be performed by placing pylons in front of the sensors and comparing the PID data to pylon placement specifications. This may be referred to as an azimuth check in the service information -Parking Assist Camera Service -Parking assist cameras are only helpful if they accurately show the driver the surrounding environment. Many operations may require these cameras to be aimed or calibrated including, but not limited to: -Camera replacement -Camera removal -Removal of a part or panel that houses a camera -Calibration procedures are explained in the vehicle service information and may require: -A scan tool -Vehicle-specific targets -A grid constructed on the floor -Calibrating the parking assist cameras ensures that their images are accurately displaying the area surrounding the vehicle -ACC Calibrations - manually adjusting a front radar module may be required before calibration. There is a certain amount of adjustment that a module can make electronically, but if the sensor is too far out of position, it may end with a calibration failure. Static calibration requires setting up targets before initiating the calibration with a scan tool. Both radar modules and cameras may use targets for calibration. Dynamic calibration is done by initiating it with the scan tool and then driving until complete. Some vehicles require both a static and dynamic calibration. With either, the vehicle should be test driven afterward to verify proper operation of the system -I-CAR Repairability Technical Support – the I-CAR Repairability Technical Support (RTS) website proves valuable information about proper repair methods and where to locate procedures. Through this website, you can access information about ADAS, calibration requirements, hybrid and electric vehicle (EV) information, and much more. -Service Information – when repairing, replacing, or diagnosing ADAS, having access to the most recent vehicle-specific service information is crucial. Don’t assume to know a procedure based on past experience. Service information is regularly updated and may have changed. In addition to current calibration procedure information, the description and operation sections help technicians understand how all the systems work together. Follow diagnostic flow charts when there is a problem with a system. Service information may also include special repair procedures. Sometimes a module has been superseded by a newer version. This may require programming updates to other modules. When they work together, like blind spot sensors, both the damaged and undamaged modules may require replacement -Blind Spot System Calibrations – sensor alignment is crucial to the proper operation of the system. This is especially true for vehicles that don’t require calibrations for blind spot sensors. Measurements may be available to repair sensor-mounted locations to as-built specifications. Programming and calibrations may be required if a sensor is replaced or reinstalled. This may require a scan tool, targets, and a large work area. Some vehicles may only require a dynamic calibration. Calibrating the sensors ensure accurate data is sent to the control module to inform the driver when a vehicle enters their blind spot. A test drive should be performed as a final check to ensure the system is functioning properly -Test Drive – while test-driving a vehicle, make sure t understand how the system is designed to function. It’s a good idea to identify a nearby road that has good lane markings for use when testing lane keep functions. ACC and blind spot alert require driving in traffic above certain speeds, so a highway may be a good choice. Check to see if vehicle-maker service information specifies road requirements for dynamic calibrations. If may be possible to monitor data with a scan tool during a test drive. For example, if the ACC is not functioning properly, it may be helpful to see exactly how many degrees off-center the radar module is reading -Blind Spot Considerations – because most blind spot radar sensors must send and receive their signal through a bumper cover, the composition and thickness of that cover must be within its designed specifications. If it is too thick, or has anything obstructing it such as dirt or stickers, the signal will be affected and the system may not work correctly. Excessive paint film thickness in the sensor areas can also obstruct the signal most vehicle makers have position statements regarding bumper repairs on vehicles with blind spot detection -Camera and Radar Issues- -Some conditions that may affect ADAS camera operation include: -A damaged or misaligned camera -An obstructed or damaged windshield -Poor weather conditions -Radar sensors may operate erratically, or may not operate at all, if there is an obstruction in front of them. This could include: -A service part sticker on the backside of a new part -An incorrect grille emblem not designed for use with a radar module -A bent license plate that is located near the radar sensor -If the vehicle does not track straight ahead due to an excessive thrust angle, some systems will not work properly. Forward radars and cameras may not pick up the vehicle ahead or may pick up a vehicle in an adjacent lane - Advanced High-Strength Steel (1/2) Types of Steel and Strength identification Steel Strength -High-Strength Steel -Steel types have been designed that allow: -Parts to be made stronger without the addition of reinforcements -Parts to be made thinner and lighter, but still have the same strength -For added control of collision energy management. Mechanical properties of new steels allow the collision energy management of a part to be fine-tuned for added energy absorption or transfer as needed -Yield and Tensile Strength – steel types can be classified by strength, mechanical properties, and metallurgical designation or the name of the steel. Steel strength may be listed as tensile strength, yield strength, or both. Mechanical properties include those things that determine the workability of the metal. The metallurgical designation is determined by the build process and alloy of the steel. Throughout this course, yield strength and tensile strength are used as common measurements -Yield and Tensile Strength – yield strength is the minimum force required to achieve permanent deformation of the steel. Before the yield point, the steel will deform elastically and return to its original shape when the stress is removed. However, once the yield point is passed, the steel plastically deforms and the damage remains. Tensile strength (or ultimate tensile strength) is defined as the measurement of the amount of force necessary to tear a piece of steel apart. Tensile and yield strength are also related to the ability to repair a steel part. As steel is deformed, either through collision forces or straightening, the yield strength rises, making the steel harder, and thus more brittle. Harder steels are prone to cracking and breaking. -Strength Measurement – the amount of strength is typically measured in megapascals (MPa) or kilopound per square inch (ksi). A pascal is a unit of measurement equivalent to one Newton per square meter. One megapascal is one million pascals. One megapascal is also equal to 145 psi or 0.145 ksi -Total Elongation – steels are also classified by a property known as “total elongation”. Total elongation is how much a material can stretch before breaking. The percentage value is determined by how long the material stretches compared to the original length. A material that can be stretched to double the original size without breaking would have a total elongation value of 100%. Total elongation occurs after the material reaches the maximum tensile strength. The total force exerted on the material will then go down and the actual fracture point will occur at a lower force than the maximum tensile strength of the material -Steel Strength Classifications – automotive steels fall into basic strength categories -Mild Steel – -Is typically any steel that has less than 270 MPa tensile strength and 210 MPa yield strength -Is easily formed and is the most repairable of the steel types used in vehicle structures -Can typically be heated during repairs as long as the limits for maximum temperature and time are observed. -Note Mild steel usage for structural parts is limited on late model vehicles -High-Strength Steel – -Typically has a tensile strength between 270 and 700 MPa and a yield strength between 210 and 550 MPa -Is made in numerous types, with each type having unique mechanical properties and strength characteristics -Is commonly used for structural parts because it can be thinner, lighter, and stronger than the same part made from a mild steel -Is heat-sensitive and is typically cold-straightened -Note: Heat can dramatically affect the strength and properties of HSS; therefore, it is not recommended -Note 2: A steel frame may be made from different strengths of steel -Ultra-High-Strength Steel – -Is very hard and strong -Has a tensile strength over 700 MPa and a yield strength over 550 MPa -Is typically used to reinforce areas and limit passenger compartment deformation in a collision -Has its strength destroyed by heat -Is typically not straightened at all due to its strength and the high degree of brittleness that it has -Increasing Steel Strength – - increasing the steel strength can be done by: -Altering the manufacturing process -Alloying the steel -The amount and rate of heating and cooling of the steel, and the pressures used as it is manufactured, can have a drastic effect on the strength of the finished steel. Alloying is mixing two or more metals or elements. For example, the percentage of carbon mixed into the iron that steel is made from is one of the main contributing factors to its final strength. Other metals are also added in small amounts to alter the properties and strength of the steel -Alloying Elements – alloying elements that are added to steel when it is made are added in very small percentages. The percentage depends on the element added and the desired properties of the steel, but are typically in the 0.1 to 5.0 percent range. Alloying elements also affect the microstructure and grain size of the finished steel, and affect the temperatures where different grain structures form during manufacture -As Steel Strength Increases – -As the strength of steel increases, it typically becomes: -Harder -More brittle -More heat sensitive -The Rockwell hardness of steel typically increases as the tensile strength is increased. This makes the steel less workable and harder to form or straighten. The Rockwell hardness scale uses a testing method based on indention testing that measures the steel’s resistance to deformation. The harder and stronger a steel is, the more prone it becomes to cracking when it is worked. The properties of HSS and UHSS are changed by heat much more than mild steels -Mechanical Properties – -Mechanical properties of steel include: -Total elongation, which is the percentage that the metal will stretch before it fractures or breaks -The work hardening exponent, which is the rate that the metal work hardens -The toughness of the metal, which is a combination of strength and ductility -For a metal to be considered very tough, it has to have high strength along with a high degree of ductility. Many very strong metals are not considered tough because they are very brittle, while many of the very ductile metals are not tough because they lack strength -Work Hardening – work hardening describes the tendency of steel to increase in strength as it is worked. Work hardening affects both the yield and tensile strength of steel, but tends to affect yield strength at a higher rate than tensile strength. This leads to an increase in the brittleness of the steel as it is work hardened. Work hardening rate differs by steel type. Higher strength steels generally work harden faster than lower strength steels. Note: Metal is work hardened when formed during manufacturing, again when deformed, and further when straightening Identifying Steel Types and Reinforcements -Identifying Steel Types – there are two ways to identify what type of steel a structural part is made of. The first method is to look up the name or metallurgical designation of the steel in vehicle maker service information. Some collision repair manuals may include information on the types of steel used to make the structure and body panels of a mild vehicle. The second method is to conduct hardness testing to categorize as mild, HSS, or UHSS. Typically, hardness testing will give numbers that can be compared to that of a known steel. This will allow the steel to be placed into a basic strength category based on the comparative data -Steel Testing – there are a variety of methods used for testing steel -Hardness Testing – -May be done with fixed or bench-mounted equipment that requires a small piece to be removed from the part -May be done with portable equipment, which allows testing without having to cut sections out of the vehicle parts -For comparison readings, hardness testing should be done with the same equipment. Do not compare results from one piece of equipment to those taken with a different piece of equipment -Drill Bit Strength – the drill bit strength is important because if the material is harder than the drill bit, it will not drill out. A standard drill bit has a strength range of around 950-1,070 MPa, which is far below some of the strengths used on todays vehicles. Drill bits made for HSS are in the strength range of 1,750-2,100 MPa. Drill bits made for UHSS are in the strength range of 2,750-3,050 MPa. If a standard drill bit is used on a 1,300 MPa part, it will never penetrate the steel. To perform the drill bit test, drill a spot weld with a standard spot weld drill bit at high speed, above 1000 rpm. If the metal burns the bit on one spot weld, it is most likely UHSS. If the drill bit drills three to five spot welds, it may still be UHSS, but at the mid to lower strength range of UHSS -Cutting/Saw Test – when performing the cutting test, if the damaged part cannot be cut with a standard air saw blade, it may be UHSS. Caution should be used with this test because some saw blades are designed for higher strength steel. If teeth are removed from the saw blade after a short cutting time, the part is most likely made of UHSS -Best Practices: Steel Identification - as a best practice for steel identification, check the vehicle maker service information, which is the most accurate method to identify the steel strength. Vehicle maker recommendations may also include repair procedures and special precautions for those parts. If no vehicle maker information can be found, a hardness tester is used to give the approximate steel strength. Note: If there is no access to a hardness tester, the drill/cut tests are used as a last resort because these tests only give a very broad idea if the steel is near HSS and are not definite -Reinforcements – inner reinforcements are used to add strength to a part. They are typically placed where the part is intended to transition from energy absorption to energy transfer. They may be in multiple locations on the frame rails of modern vehicles, and may be found spaced along the entire length of the rail. They also may be used to help design crush zones into the part. Inner reinforcements are typically made from HSS or UHSS -Inner Reinforcement Considerations – inner reinforcement considerations include limits to the amount of straightening that can be done. Areas that have HSS or UHSS reinforcements inside will be so stiff and strong that it is often not practical to straighten visible damage in these areas. Straightening of rails or pillars in reinforced areas is limited to minor movement of the part that does not show visible deformation. Limits to sectioning locations for the part are also a consideration. Heat input from welding is a consideration, because inner reinforcements are typically made from higher strength steels. There are also corrosion protection considerations because of limited access to parts that are buried deep within an assembly. -Multiple Reinforcements – structural parts may have multiple reinforcements inside them. Reinforcements may be staggered through the part to help create collapse zones. This is especially true of frame rails. The areas that are reinforced will be very strong and transfer collision energy, while the areas between reinforcements will be weaker and will collapse to absorb energy. They may also be layered on top of each other in a part. This is done to add strength to the part and to keep it from collapsing. Layered reinforcements are typically found in A-, B-, and C-pillars Metallurgical Designation -Usage – each type of steel has some common automotive usages -Typical Mild Steel Usage – mild steel is typically used for: -Outer body panels -Center floor pans, trunk floors, and cowl panels -Some outer unisides and pillars -HSS Usage – HSS is typically found on: -Some outer body panels, allowing them to be made thinner and lighter -Major structural parts -Reinforcements for structural parts -Other Types of Steel – -Dual-phase (dp) and complex-phase steel: -Is a type of steel that comes in many different types, depending on the desired strength and mechanical properties -Use is becoming common on front frame rails and other structural parts of unitized because it offers both good strength and energy absorption, making it a tough steel -Transformation Induced Plasticity (TRIP) steel: -Has tensile strengths in the 500-1050 MPa range -Has similar mechanical properties as DP steels, but with slightly more ductility -Martensitic (MART) steels: -Are very strong and hard, with tensile strengths up to 1700 MPa -Typically have low ductility, low total elongation percentages, and high yield strength-to-tensile strength ratios. This make them hard to form and very difficult to straighten when damaged -Hot Stamped Parts – hot stamped parts are made by stamping the sheet steel while it is very hot. Parts are then quenched to cool while still in the dies. This id done to add increased formability with higher strength steels, and the heating and quenching process can actually increase the steel strength. They are typically made from boron-alloyed steels. The strength of a boron-alloyed steel part can increase as much as 250% during the hot stamping process. In addition, hot stamped parts are typically not galvanized because the high heat used during stamping would destroy the galvanized coating -Boron-Alloyed Steel- -Boron-alloyed steel: -Is very strong and hard, with tensile strengths up to 1600 MPa -Typically has low ductility, low total elongation percentages, and high yield strength-to-tensile strength ratios -Should not be straightened -Locations on unitized structures where boron-alloyed steel parts may be found include: -Door intrusion beams -Bumper reinforcements -Roof structures -Pillar inner panels and reinforcements -Rocker panel reinforcements -Rear body panels -Note: Boron-alloyed steels may be called by different names Advanced High-Strength Steel ( 2 /2) Steel Repair Considerations Repair Considerations for Structural Steel Parts -Steel Strength and Repair Considerations – the increased strength of the HSS and UHSS used in the parts of a unitized structure has various effects on the collision repair process -Steel Strength and Collision Damage – the inclusion of higher strength steels in vehicle structures has led to changes in the way vehicles are damaged during collisions. These changes include less passenger compartment deformation and fewer visible damage indicators, along with more collision energy transfer into the vehicle structure. Damage may radiate deeper into the structure and cause deformation of the softer parts of the structure, well away from the area of the primary damage -HSS and UHSS Straightening Considerations – HSS and UHSS structural parts add some considerations to the structural straightening process. These considerations include that increased force is required to straighten a damaged HSS part. Most UHSS parts that are damaged should not be straightened and will require replacement. Kink vs bend may not apply to damaged parts made of higher strength steels. The kink vs bend rule was made when most structural parts were made of mild steel or conventional high-strength steel that falls into the lower strength range of the group. With newer, advanced HSS and UHSS, even minor visible damage may be hard to repair -Steel Strength and Repair Considerations – the increased strength of the HSS and UHSS used in the parts of a unitized structure has various effects on the collision repair process -Steel Strength and Collision Damage – the inclusion of higher strength steels in vehicle structures has led to changes in the way vehicles are damaged during collisions. These changes include less passenger compartment deformation and fewer visible damage indicators, along with more collision energy transfer into the vehicle structure. Damage may radiate deeper into the structure and cause deformation of the softer parts of the structure, well away from the area of the primary damage -HSS and UHSS Straightening Considerations – HSDS and UHSS structural parts add some considerations to the structural straightening process. These considerations include that increased force is required to straighten a damaged HSS part. Most UHSS parts that are damaged should not be straightened and will require replacement. Kink vs bend may not apply to damaged parts made of higher strength steels. The kink vs bend rule was made when most structural parts were made of mild steel or conventional high-strength steel that falls into the lower strength range of the group, with newer, advanced HSS and UHSS, even minor visible damage may be hard to repair -Heat Sensitivity – parts made from higher strength steel should not be heated unless vehicle maker documentation allows it or the part is going to be replaced. The heat-affect zone (HAZ) when welding should also be considered. Use only enough heat to make a sound weld. Make practice welds that are destructively tested to verify the quality of the weld -Yield Strength-to-Tensile Strength – the yield strength-to-tensile strength ratio indicates the ductility of the steel. A lower number indicates a higher ductility of steel. “1” indicates no ductility at all. It affects the formability and repairability of the steel. If a steel has a yield strength that is very close to the tensile strength, it is considered unrepairable. This is because when there is enough force put on the steel to move it plastically, it will typically crack. For example, a frame rail that cracks when pulled back into position is likely made from a steel with a high yield-to-tensile ratio -Work Hardening Rate – steel parts used in unitized structures gain a good deal of their final strength through work hardening when parts are formed. Collision damage further work hardens the part and the straightening process adds to it again. This limits the amount of straightening that should be done, because even if the part is restored to its correct shape, the mechanical properties and strength of the part may be significantly different than intended. Work hardening also tends to make a part more brittle and prone to cracking when straightened -Structural Straightening Considerations – straightening high-strength steel structural parts may require increased pulling force and additional anchoring to avoid collateral damage to other parts of the vehicle -Complete Part Replacement – complete part replacement is more common with the new steels and construction technologies being used today. Straightening and sectioning issues with HSS and UHSS, and multiple reinforcements, are leading to more instances where complete replacement may be required Heat Effects on Steel -Heat Effects on Steel – the strength and mechanical properties of steel may be changed by the application of heat -Heat Effects on Steel – the effect of heat on steel varies depending on the type of steel and other variables. It also alters the strength of the part. Heat tends to strengthen mild steels, weaken high-strengths steels, and completely destroy the strength of most ultra-high-strength steels -Mechanical Properties – the effect of heat on steel also changes the mechanical properties. The amount of heat and the rate at which it is applied, as well as the cooling rate, can have a dramatic effect on the mechanical properties of the steel. Mild steels tend to become more brittle when heated, while some of the higher strength steels may become softer and more formable. This may lead to a part that was intended to transfer collision energy actually absorbing it instead, and a part that should absorb energy may either crack or be hard enough to transfer the energy instead -Video: Heat Effects on Steel – using a tensile strength tester and strips of metal, you can see how heat affects both the strength and mechanical properties of different types of steel -Steel Heating Considerations – heating considerations for steel include: -UHSS parts should not be straightened unless vehicle maker documentation states that it can be straightened -Steel parts should be straightened cold unless vehicle maker documentation states that heat can be used -Observe the limits for both maximum temperature and the length of time can be heated. If a vehicle maker has heating recommendations, they typically include a maximum temperature and amount of time that the part can be subjected to heat -Observe the limits for both maximum temperature and the length of time a part can be heated. If a vehicle maker has heating recommendations, they typically include a maximum temperature and amount of time that the part can be subjected to heat -Use heat on parts that are going to be replaced during initial straightening. This may help to reduce collateral damage to adjacent parts -Note: Using heat on parts that are going to be replaced during initial straightening allows the entire structure to be returned to proper dimensions without having to apply excessive force to remove damage to HSS and UHSS parts that are going to be replaced -HSS and UHSS Welding Considerations -Heat-Affect Zone – considerations for welding HSS and UHSS include the heat-affect zone that welding creates. The strength and mechanical properties of steel can be greatly changed by the extreme heat in the heat-affect zone. Heat-affect zone softening typically increases as the steel strength increases. Because of this, when welding on HSS and UHSS, the amount of heat input into the metal should be held to the minimum necessary to make a quality weld. Methods that can help control the heat input include making stitch welds where long continuous welds are needed, and using welding equipment that utilizes the pulse-spray transfer method -STRSW – another consideration for welding HSS and UHSS includes that squeeze-type resistance spot welding (STRSW) may be the preferred welding method to use on HSS and UHSS. STRSW equipment may have separate HSS and UHSS settings that also help to reduce the HAZ of the weld. These settings may work by pulsing the current input into the weld Acura NSX Aluminum Repair and Refinishing -Course Overview – the Acura NSX Aluminum Repair and Refinishing training course is designed to provide a basic understanding of the aluminum repairs and refinishing allowed on the second-generation Acura NSX. This includes aluminum panel repair, surface preparation, and refinishing considerations. -Learning Objectives – learning objectives for this module include: -Explaining Acura NSX aluminum repair requirements -Explaining aluminum panel straightening -Explaining galvanic corrosion concerns -Explaining Acura NSX-specific repair considerations -Repair Process Criteria – -Non-structural repairs allowed at NSX Non-Structural Repair Network shops -Repairs include -Bolt-on parts -Paint damage -Glass replacement -Bonded parts -Dedicated Aluminum Work Area -Typically a separate room -Aluminum dust extraction system -Explosion proof -Dedicated hand tools -Protects from cross contamination and potential for galvanic corrosion -Minimum recommended size -26.2 ft long x 16.4 ft wide (8 m x 5 m) -Safety Consideration -Maintain a safe work environment -Proper personal protective and safety equipment -Correct use of tools and equipment -When is Straightening Allowed – -Outer aluminum panels only -No structural straightening allowed -Replace outer panels if the inner panel / support is damaged -Note: Straightening damaged aluminum is allowed on NSX outer panels only. -Hammer and Dolly Techniques – -Hammer-off-dolly preferred for aluminum -Hamer-on-dolly primarily used for steel -Spoon / slapper may also be used -Note: For aluminum damage repairs, the hammer-off-dolly technique (left) is preferred over the hammer-on-dolly technique (right) -Heating Temperatures – -Aluminum does not change color when heated to melting point -Aluminum oxide melts at about 3,700 degrees Fahrenheit (2,038 degrees Celsius) -Temperate is more critical than time -Heat spreads faster in aluminum than steel -Aluminum outer panels may be heated -Do not exceed 392 degrees Fahrenheit (200 degrees Celsius) -Monitor temperature -Weld-On Dent Removal Tools – -Tools designed specifically for aluminum -Disconnect battery and isolate cables before using -Used when there is limited access to the panel backside -Tools for aluminum require more electrical current than tools for steel -Note: Weld-on dent removal is used for pulling out low spots on a panel -Removal Sequence – -1) Identify the area of the dent -2) Remove the finish using P80 grit or finer sandpaper -3) Attach the ground clamp -4) Install the weld-on stud -5) Start on the area with the least amount of damage -Note: Be sure to follow the appropriate sequence when using a weld-on dent removal tool. -Paintless Dent Repair (PDR) / Glue-On Tabs – -Requires access to panel backside -Do not drill holes for access -Glue-on dent removal when there is no backside access -Note: With PDR, picks are used to raise a low area from the backside of a panel. -Note: A glue-on dent removal system can be used when there is no backside access. -Hand Tools and Abrasives - -Separate tools used for steel from tools used from aluminum -Have dedicated abrasives -Label or color-code tools and abrasive -Note: These are dedicated tools labeled for aluminum repairs -Hand Tool Considerations – -Polished steel face with edges rounded off -Aluminum-faced -Plastic-faced / rubber -Wood with leather face -Pouches of lead shot -Picks -Note: The edges of this hammer are rounded to help avoid damaging aluminum. -Note: The steel face of this hammer is being polished for working on aluminum. -Note: Using a rubber hammer is an option for working on aluminum. -Note: Using an aluminum hammer is an option when repairing aluminum. -Note: Serrated-faced hammers should not be used to repair aluminum. -Aluminum and Steel Applications – -Seal out moisture -Separate steel and aluminum with a non-conductive insulator -Used coated fasteners -Note: The aluminum is turning white as the aluminum corrodes. -Note : Fasteners have coatings applied to protect against corrosion. -Note: When unprotected fasteners are used, the result is galvanic corrosion. -Aluminum Dust Particles and Cautions – -Grind or sand at low speeds using light pressure -Helps reduce chance of overheating aluminum, clogging abrasive, embedding contaminants -Dust extraction system and sparkless vacuum -Particles are nontoxic, lightweight, irritant -Note: Use a sparkless vacuum to collect aluminum dust particles -No Straightening (Structural) – -No straightening is allowed on frame parts -Damaged parts must be replaced -Note: No straightening is allowed on NSX space frame parts -Crack Inspection – -Use dye penetrant to check for cracks -Three steps -Remover -Penetrant -Developer -Note: Dye penetrant can be used to check damaged areas and welds for cracks and flaws. -Outer Panel Repairs – -No serrated or pick-type hammers -No sharp-edged tools for straightening -Work slowly and evenly -No excessive sanding / grinding -Too much heat will distort panel -Note: This shows how aluminum repair processes compare to similar repairs on steel. -Removal – -Attached with urethane adhesive and bolts -Stay close to roof panel when cutting the adhesive -To prevent damage to the body -Note: During removal, stay as close to the roof panel as possible when cutting the adhesive. -Installation – -Refer to service information for surface preparations and adhesive locations -Refer to adhesive product maker for use conditions and drying time, -Note: Adhesive is located around the perimeter as well as various spots in the middle of the roof panel. -Aluminum – -Also called rear floor -Attached with structural adhesive and rivets. -Note: The middle floor pans are stamped aluminum -Non-Load Bearing – -Rear floor pans are non-load bearing -If seats are removed, use a support across the extrusion crossmembers. -Note: Do not place a load on the rear floor pans -Module Summary – Topics discussed in the module included: -Acura NSX aluminum repair requirement -Aluminum panel straightening -Galvanic corrosion concerns -Acura NSX-specific repair considerations -Learning Objectives – learning objectives for this module include: -Explaining aluminum surface preparation -Explaining aluminum refinishing considerations -Surface Preparation – -Sand the surface and remove the dust -Apply body filler as soon as possible after sanding -Note: Clean the surface with a wax and grease remover -Body Filler – -Polyester body fillers consist of a polyester resin, a catalyst, and talc -Body filler may also contain aluminum powder -Note: Ensure body filler is mixed properly. -Primer – -Prepare the surface by cleaning, sanding, masking, applying primer, sanding cured primer -Refinishing is similar to refinishing steel -Note: Apply primer following the product maker’s recommendations. -Refinishing Considerations – -Epoxy primer – -Applicable for aluminum -After drying apply putty, primer-surface, and topcoat directly -Wash primer - -Applicable for aluminum -Heating device is needed -Polyester putty, epoxy primer, and topcoat cannot be applied directly -Note: There are specific considerations regarding the primer layer. -Module Summary – topics discussed in this module included: -Aluminum surface preparation -Aluminum refinishing considerations ADAS and Convenience Systems Overview and Service (1/2) Course Overview -Course Overview – in this course, we will review some of the comfort and convenience systems, as well as some of the advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS), found on modern vehicles. To gain a competitive advantage, vehicle makers add new comfort and convenience systems to their vehicles frequently. While these systems used to be found primarily in luxury vehicles, many vehicle makers have made these systems standard or optional features on their vehicles. This course provides you an overview of these systems, their pairs, and common repair procedures. -Common Diagnostics and Troubleshooting – when performing diagnostic and troubleshooting procedures, most inspections will begin with a physical inspection for physical damage, such as collision impact or damaged wiring, sensors, lines or hoses, and malfunction indicator lamps (MILs). In most cases, the physical inspection will need to be followed by a vehicle scan to retrieve any diagnostic trouble codes (DTCs) stored in memory. In many cases, accessing vehicle maker service information will provide the best DTC identification tables and troubleshooting aids such as system diagrams and diagnostic flowcharts. However, in some cases, a quick internet search may allow you to identify the DTCs retrieved during the vehicle scan. Note: Always reference vehicle maker service procedures to identify proper repair procedures, mandatory replacement items, service precautions, and required calibrations or initializations following system service. -Electronic Diagnostics – when troubleshooting power accessory failures with no vehicle-specific troubleshooting flowchart, follow the I-CAR Five Step Troubleshooting Flowchart. The steps in this flowchart require: -Defining the problem -Knowing the system -Finding the cause -Making the repair -Testing the system -Note: With electronic systems, diagnosis starts with checking for power, ground, and shorts, conducting typical tests, checking network communications, and troubleshooting. Power Locks, Keyless Entry, Theft-Deterrent, and Remote Start Systems -Power Locks – power lock systems typically include door lock assemblies, lock rod/linkages, sensors, actuators, control switches, and control modules that process commands to lock or unlock the vehicle. On newer vehicles, power locks may be locked or unlocked using many different ways including interior door switches, key fobs, and smartphone applications. -Power Lock System – most modern vehicles have the lock/unlock feature programmed into the control module. When the vehicle reaches a specific speed or when the transmission is shifted into DRIVE, the locks automatically engage. -Part Replacement Considerations – when servicing power locks, it is important to remember that adjustment, calibration, or initialization may need to be performed after parts are removed and installed. An example service procedure for replacing the door lock actuator may include. -1) Turn the ignition switch OFF and wait the prescribed time before proceeding -2) Disconnect the cable from the negative battery terminal -3) Remove the required trim and assembly to gain access to the front door lock with motor assembly -4) Disconnect the electrical connector -5) Remove the screws and slide the front door lock with motor assembly downward to disconnect the front door lock open rod -6) Remove the front door lock with motor assembly and cables as a unit -Note: To install the replacement actuator, reverse the removal steps -Keyless Entry Operation – a keyless entry system controls access to the vehicle without using a traditional mechanical key. These systems typically use an electronic control module to activate motors that control the vehicle locks. Keyless entry may be divided into two categories, active and passive. -Active keyless entry is the traditional keyless entry where a key fob is pressed to unlock the doors or trunk, or to start the engine -Passive keyless entry allows vehicle entry without pushing buttons on a key fob. Simply carrying a pass key will unlock the door and start the engine with a push-button. This system may also be part of the vehicle push-button starting system. -System Parts – common parts of a keyless entry system include: -Keyless entry transmitters -Antennas (located throughout the interior to cover the entire vehicle) -An exterior antenna -Control modules -Exterior lighting (if equipped) -Theft-Deterrent System – the typical theft-deterrent system is designed to sound an alarm and/or flash the exterior lights during forced entry. These theft-deterrent systems have been improved over the years to include more advanced electronics to detect intrusion and limit theft. -Types – there are three common types of theft-deterrent systems: -Telematics subscription service -Listening devices -Engine immobilizers -Note: The telematics subscription service that has a Stolen Vehicle Slowdown feature allows the service provider to slow down, stop, and recover stolen vehicles that might be involved in a high-speed chase. This feature is in addition to features that use global positioning system (GPS) technology to locate lost or stolen vehicles. Listening devices detect the sound of glass breaking and trip an alarm if the sound is heard. Engine immobilizers activate when anything other than the proper key is used to start the vehicle. -System Parts – parts that make up a theft-deterrent system include: -Door lock control system parts -A control module -A security horn, which may be powered independent of the battery -A security indicator lamp -Door, hood, and trunk ajar switches -A glass breakage sensor and a glass breakage sensor electronic control unit (ECU), if equipped. -Operation – the theft-deterrent system operates when the doors are locked, either manually or remotely. The system monitors movement, noise, latches, and/or vehicle movement, and it sets off an alarm when specific criteria are met. On some systems, the switches are checked three times per second to make sure the switches are closed. These systems may also have a movement sensor that detects movement inside the vehicle. This particular system requires the windows to be closed for proper operation. Some systems have a heartbeat sensor. The heartbeat sensor is used to detect the presence of someone inside the vehicle, with an indicator on the key fob. -Service Considerations – most theft-deterrent system parts are integrated with other systems, so looking for related DTCs when performing a vehicle scan may aid in the troubleshooting process. Common system faults may include the: -System not arming -Alarm not sounding and/or the proper lights not flashing -System arming when the doors/lids are open -Note: The horns are most susceptible to damage in a front-end collision -Remote Start – remote starters are designed to start a vehicle engine before the driver enters the vehicle. There are a variety of vehicle maker and aftermarket designs. Remote start systems may use one-way or two-way communication between the key fob and the vehicle. One-way systems use radio control signals that communicate from the key fob to the vehicle. Two-way systems communicate back to the key fob and may illuminate a key fob indicator to confirm the engine has started. Newer vehicles commonly feature remote starts that can be operated via a smart phone app. Glass and Power Mirror System -Power Mirrors – in addition to power adjustment of the mirror itself, power side mirrors on modern vehicles may be integrated with a number of systems including: -Lane departure warning/lane keep assist -360-degree surround view -Self-park -Note: on some vehicles, the mirrors may angle downward when the vehicle is in REVERSE and may automatically fold in when the ignition is OFF and the vehicle is locked. -Power Mirror Operation – power mirrors are typically controlled by a switch that directs power to the appropriate mirror control circuit when the directional button is pushed. On older vehicles, pushing the button may have provided power directly to the mirror motor; on modern vehicles, pushing the button may send a signal to a control module that then sends the appropriate command signal to the mirror motor to move. System parts commonly associated with a power mirror assembly include: -Control switches -A fuse or relay -Position sensors, or potentiometers, for the memory option -Mirror motors or drive mechanism -Options – optional equipment that may be included with a power mirror assembly includes: -Heated mirrors. A heating element is used on the backside of the glass to defrost a mirror. -Electrochromatic mirrors. This feature is used to reduce headlamp glare. -Memory systems. These systems are used to readjust mirrors to a previous setting. -An automatic day/night feature of the driver outside rearview mirror that is controlled by the inside rearview mirror. This inside rearview mirror supplies a signal and a low reference to the driver outside rearview mirror. -Directional signals in the mirror. -Power fold-in mirrors. -Telescoping mirrors. -Passenger side park-assist mirrors. -Lighting. -Service Considerations – an example side mirror replacement procedure may include -1) Removing the door trim panel to expose the mirror bolts. -2) Removing insulators, hole plugs, etc. -3) Disconnecting the connector. -4) Removing the nuts securing the mirror to the door. -Note: Reverse the steps to install the new assembly. Always reference vehicle maker service information to identify which systems the vehicle you are servicing may be equipped with and perform all necessary calibrations and initializations following system service. Note: Breakaway mirror assemblies are typically friction-fitted and may require special tools for removal. -Power Window Operation – a power window system: -Uses a two-directional motor. -May use a cable and a pulley system. -May use two gear arms between the window and drive source. -May use a spring-assist device to reduce the amount of current required to lower and raise a window. -Note: To operate the system, the wiring harness transmits a signal from the switch to the relay. A relay is used because the switches and computers cannot handle the amount of current necessary to power the window. The relay sends current to the motor that powers the window. A relay may also be used to prevent the operation of the windows when the ignition is OFF. -Related System Parts – system parts commonly associated with a power window assembly include a: -Motor -Switch -Relay -Regulator -Wiring Harness -Control Module -Fuse -Removing and Installing Window Regulators – when removing and installing a window regulator: -1) Remove the trim panel to access the inner door area. -2) Remove the moisture barrier and the door glass. -3) Identify the regulator-to-door attachment method. Regulators can be attached with bolts or rivets. Rivets can be a special design called a “t” or peel-type and must be replaced with the same type rivet. -4) Remove the regulator-to-door shell fasteners. -5) Inspect the replacement regulator to make sure it is undamaged and is the correct part. -6) Position the regulator in the door shell and install the regulator-to-door shell fasteners. -7) Install the door glass. -8) Check for proper operation of the window through its full range of movement. -9) Install the moisture barrier and door trim panel. -Sunroofs – a power sunroof assembly opens and closes using either a cable and pully system and a reversible, or bi-directional, motor or a worm gear system. When the motor is not operating, both the sunroof motor open circuit and sunroof motor close circuit are grounded. Some modules are equipped with a timer circuit, which stops the operation of the sunroof motor after 8 seconds. Power sunroof systems may have an express open feature or a vent feature, and either slide between the roof and the headliner or pop up over the roof panel. -Mechanical Inspection – when inspecting the operation of power sunroof assemblies: -Look for the full range of travel. -Verify the proper operation of the express feature, if applicate. -Verify proper operation of the vent open feature. -Note: If glass panel replacement is necessary, cycle the sunroof through its full range of travel, looking for interference that may be the cause of the glass breakage. Any damage to the housing or tracks can then be repaired before replacing the glass, avoiding the possibility of breaking the replacement glass panel when opening and closing the sunroof. -Sunroof Timing – the timing of the drive motor and cables that move the glass panel in a sliding sunroof assembly is critical to the proper operation of the unit. The timing may be set or adjusted to a variety of methods. Procedures used to set or adjust cable timing are typically vehicle-specific. Always reference vehicle maker service information to identify proper service and adjustment procedures and any calibration or initialization requirements. Seat Systems -Seat Options – there are many options available in seating systems for modern vehicles including heaters and coolers, inflatable back support, and seat position memory systems. -Seat Heaters/Coolers – advancements in seat technology are, for the most part, designed to increase comfort and reduce driver fatigue. One such technology is climate-controlled seats. Climate-controlled seats provide heat through electronically controlled heating elements and ventilation through perforated seat covers, which may be integrated with the air conditioning (A/C) system. These seats cannot heat and cool at the same time. -Climate-Controlled Seating System Parts – the serviceable climate-controlled seat system parts may include: -An air filter. -Cushion and backrest manifolds. -Cushion and backrest foam pads and trim covers. -A heat/cool seat switch. -Fuses. -Ventilation ducts. -Blowers. -Lumbar Support – some seat systems use an air pump to inflate a bladder located inside the seat. An example of this is found in power lumber systems. The lumbar switch directly controls the lumbar air pump, which is used to inflate and deflate the lumbar bladder. Some seats utilize a manual adjustment knob that moves supports built into the seat back to adjust lumbar support. -Power Seats and Memory Systems – power seats utilize switches, relays, sensors, and motors similar to other power accessories. There are many different power configurations for seats that determine the number of directions the seat can be moved and tilted. The switch position controls voltage and polarity to operate the motors and move the seat in the intended direction. Some vehicle makers feature memory systems that allow drivers to store and quickly recall their desired seat positions with the push of a single button. In some vehicles, this memory feature may also store pedal location preference. -Seat Removal Considerations – seats are mounted to the floor pan through the carpet. To locate the seat mount locations, adjustable seats may need to be in the complete forward or rearward position to access the mounting fasteners. Refer to the vehicle maker service information for proper removal procedures. Seats with a manual adjuster may require them to be placed in the full forward position to remove the rear attaching nuts. If the seat is not in the forward position when removing the nuts, the seat track can spring forward, causing personal injury. Never sit on the seat when the seat and the track assembly are not installed in the vehicle. -Folding Seats – some vehicles, such as minivans and SUVs, may have folding seats designed to be quickly folded down and stowed or removed from the vehicle to create additional cargo space. In some cases, these seats may be power-operated and will utilize switches, sensors, and motors much like standard power seats. Note: Always reference vehicle maker service information as these seating systems typically require calibration or initialization procedures to ensure safe and proper operation. Power Sliding Door Systems -Power Sliding Door Operations – a power sliding door operates when the OPEN/CLOSE switch is pressed and the ON/OFF switch is on. The power sliding door latch switch helps determine the position of the door and sends the information to the power sliding door module. When one of the OPEN switches is pressed, the power sliding door module sends a signal to the latch release actuator. The latch release actuator releases the door latch. The door operation requires the vehicle to be in PARK before it will open. Once the door is released by the latch actuator, the drive assembly actuator slides the door. An optical position sensor may be located on the driver assembly actuator and is used by the control module to determine the position of the door. -Related System Pats – system parts commonly associated with a power sliding door assembly include -A drive assembly actuator. -A latch release actuator. -A position sensor. -A door switch plate plungers and pads. -A power sliding door latch switch. -An overhead console. -An ON/OFF switch for both doors. -Motion Sensor Switches – the hands-free access system only operates when the key fob is within range and only under specific conditions. In order to prevent the door from opening while the vehicle is in motion, or when animals, balls, etc. pass near the sensor, the motion sensors are programmed to respond to a specific sequence of movement. In general, this is the user approaching the vehicle, and the foot kicking in and then out. As an additional safety feature, the key fob must be outside the vehicle. Once triggered, the sensors alert the control module, which sends a command to the electric motor to either open or close. -Part Replacement Considerations – if a malfunction is detected in the power sliding door sensor assembly, you should investigate these areas by checking for applicable DTCs. Also reference vehicle service information to identify diagnostic procedures such as checking resistance measurements for: -Power slide door sensor assembly. -Touch sensor. -Rear door wire. -Wire harness or connector. -Side door motor unit. -Power slide door electronic control unit (ECU). -Calibrations – if the ECU for the power sliding door is replaced, the system may require initialization or calibration. An example service procedure for reinitializing the power sliding door may include the following steps: -1) Turn the main power door switch on the dash to ‘OFF’. -2) Close the door manually. -3) remove the negative battery cable for 1 minute and then reconnect it. -4) Turn the key to ‘ON’. -5) Push the main door switch on the dash to ‘ON’. -6) Push the power door switch to open the door. -7) Wait 3 seconds. -8) Close the door with the switch. -9) Wait 3 seconds. -10) Repeat steps 6 through 9. Windshield Wiper Systems -Windshield Wiper System Features – windshield wiper systems may include variable speeds with intermittent wipers. Some systems include a wipe-after-wash feature. The wipe-after-wash function turns the wipers on for a set period of time, usually between six and ten seconds. Other systems use “Depressed Park”. This feature engages the wiper motor so that it drops the wipers below the windshield trim when they are not in use. -Wiper Operation – when the wiper switch is activated: -A current is sent to a relay box. A relay may be used to reduce the size of the wires leading into the steering column. -The relay sends power to the wiper motor. -The activated wiper motor rotates a spindle that is connected to the wiper linkages. -Note: Wiper systems are normally open and only operate when the ignition switch is in the ON or ACC position. -Rain-Sensing Wipers – contrary to the name, it is mot the wipers that sense rain on the windshield, but rather it is an infrared sensor module. The sensor module is mounted on the interior side of the windshield, in a housing either next to, or part of, the base of the rearview mirror. The module connector is also usually in the same housing. Rain-sensing wipers are designed to detect moisture on the windshield and auto-start the wipers when on. When rain is present, the light is deflected and less light makes it back to the photo diode. A signal is then sent to the wiper motor module to automatically start the wipers. Parts included in the rain-sensing wiper assembly include the: -Wiper assembly (blades, linkage, etc.) -Wiper motor. -Rain sensor. -Junction boxes. -Wiper motor module. -Rain-Sensing Wiper Operation – in general, the rain sensing system operates like this: -With rain sensing wiper systems, the user sets the system to the desired sensitivity. -The wiper switch is in one of the ON settings, or on an automatic setting. -The Rain sensor sends an infrared beam of light toward the cabin side of the windshield and the light reflects back into a photo diode sensor. -When rain is present, the light is deflected and less light makes it back to the photo diode. -When the sensor module detects reduced light, a signal is sent to the wiper motor module to automatically start the wipers. -Note: Always check the vehicle maker’s service information to the specific system operation. Heated Glass Systems -Heated Glass – nearly all modern vehicles are equipped with heated glass systems. One example, of a heated glass system is the rear defrosters, which typically uses a thin electrical element to warm the glass. When the switch is pressed, power is sent to the system timer switch. This switch energizes the relay. When the relay contacts close, voltage is sent to the heater grid. Resistance in the grid creates heat to warm the glass. When the time cycle is complete, the relay de-energizes to open the circuit. A timer circuit is used to prevent battery drain and charging system failure. Most have a 10-minute cycle. System parts associated with a rear defroster system may include: -Switch. -Time relay. -Fuse. -Heating grid. -Heated Windshield – some vehicle makers provide heated windshields, which are made by laying a nearly invisibly web of tungsten wires within the windshield glass. Heated windshields may also feature a heated wiper park that resembles and works in conjunction with the back glass defroster. When the rear defogger switch is pressed, typically the heated mirror system also engages (if equipped). The defogger relay energizes the heated mirror grid. This allows the computer-controlled timer to control both the heated mirror and defogger. -Heated Glass Service Considerations – tests used to determine electrical problems with heated glass may include voltage or continuity. Voltage tests are typically done at the defroster grid terminals to confirm the appropriate voltage is reaching the defroster grid, and continuity checks are done to confirm there are no breaks in the defroster grid lines. Repairs to the defroster grid system may include repairing: -Loose terminals with a conductive epoxy or solder. -Damaged grid lines with a conductive paint. Navigation/Infotainment Systems -Navigation/Infotainment Systems – navigation/infotainment systems are available on most vehicles as standard equipment or as an option. Some infotainment system features may include: -GPS navigation. -Satellite radio. -Wi-Fi hotspot connectivity. -DVD video for rear seat passengers. -Multi-zone audio/video control, which allows passengers in different areas of the vehicle to listen to different audio/video programming. -Apple Carplay, Android Auto, and/or Amazon Alex integration. -Vehicle performance information. -Navigation System Operation – navigation/infotainment systems typically receive signals from satellites to identify the vehicle’s position and direction by combing received data with information obtained from an onboard computer and various sensors. The GPS transmits geolocation and time information, which is received by a GPS receiver located in the vehicle’s navigation/infotainment system. Navigation/infotainment systems: -Process GPS signals to detect the vehicle’s location, -Detect the direction of travel. -Detect the travel distance. -Display maps on the navigation system screen. -Check GPS and sensor information against a map database. -Navigation System Parts – navigation/infotainment parts commonly include: -AM/FM antenna. -GPS antenna. -GPS receiver. -Direction sensor. -Speed sensor. -Display. -Navigation computer. -Antenna Service Considerations – when servicing a navigation/infotainment system antenna, removal may require accessing the backside of the panel to which it is mounted. Antennas located on the roof typically require removing or repositioning the headliner to access the antenna mounting fastener and antenna wiring. Specifically designed tools may be necessary to remove fender-mounted antennas. Following system service, always reference vehicle maker service information to identify required calibration procedures for the navigation/infotainment system. Occasionally, the system may not immediately recognize the correct location of the vehicle and may require repositioning the vehicle away from power lines or other sources of interference. ADAS and Convenience Systems Overview and Service (2/2) High Beam Assist, Adaptive Lighting, and Night Vision Systems -High Beam Assist – the high beam assist system uses a forward-facing camera that detects light color, intensity, and movement to determine when the high beams should be turned on and off. This system ensures the best headlamp setting to illuminate the road ahead regardless of whether you are driving on a highway, a country road, or in the city. The high beam assist system will monitor things such as: -Approaching vehicle headlamps and turn off high beams. -Preceding vehicle’s tail lamps and turn off high beams. -Outside light and turn the high beams on if necessary to ensure maximum visibility or off it is bright enough that the high beam headlamps are not required. -Adaptive Lighting – the adaptive front lighting system (AFS) generally does not operate with the transmission in reverse or at vehicle speeds less than 2 mph (3.2 km/h). This may vary by vehicle maker. Movement of the headlamps may be restricted at low vehicle speeds, and full movement of the lamps may not be allowed until vehicle speed is greater than about 30 mph (48 km/h). -System Parts – adaptive front lighting parts include swiveling and leveling actuators, control modules, and sensors such as the: -Steering wheel angle sensor -Vehicle speed sensor -Vehicle height sensor -Night Vision – night vision assist systems extend the perception of the driver beyond the reach of the headlamps through the use of thermographic cameras, infrared lights, head-up display, and other technologies. - courtesy of BMW -Night Vision System Parts – night view assist systems may use near-infrared technology. Night vision enhancement systems that use this technology require special infrared “flood lamps” to project infrared light into the surrounding area. The projected light is similar to what is used for many household remote controls. The night view assist system is typically activated when the headlamps are on and may detect objects a set distance ahead in darkness. Some systems can detect objects nearly 500 feet (152 m) in front of the vehicle. When it is activated, the system displays the images on a black-and-white screen typically found in the instrument panel or console. -Thermal Imaging – thermal imaging systems use far-infrared technology without active infrared illumination. It essentially converts thermal radiation into electronic signals. The sensor elements alter the resistance in proportion to the temperature. The higher the temperature, the higher the signal, creating a whiter pixel. This system also: -Shows objects ahead in varying degrees of brightness depending on the temperature of these objects. Provides a warning in the head-up display and the central information display. Has a heater element on the inside of the protective window to prevent the camera lens from misting over or freezing up. Blind Spot Detection, Cross-Traffic Alert, and Parking Assist Systems -Blind Spot Detection – many vehicles are now equipped with blind spot detection systems that detect vehicles approaching from behind in an adjacent lane. On some vehicles, the blind spot detection system has an indicator lamp in the door mirror. The blind spot detection system: -Engages when the turn signal is activated and signals the driver when a vehicle is approaching. -Generally uses radar to gauge the distance of approaching vehicles. -May use a camera in the door mirror to watch for approaching vehicles. -Is designed to ignore stationary objects. -System Parts – primary blind spot detection system parts include: - Sensors , which are generally located behind the rear bumper cover on each side. - Cameras, which are typically mounted beneath door mirrors to aid in detecting approaching traffic. - A steering wheel , which on some systems vibrates when vehicles are detected in the blind spot. - A control module , which calculates speed, object position, and vehicle tracking. Control modules cannot be adjusted or repaired. -Service Considerations – always reference vehicle maker service information to identify required calibration procedures following service on any of the blind spot detection system parts. These calibrations may require using a vehicle-specific diagnostic and targeting equipment. Calibration may also be required after rear bumper cover removal or replacement. In some cases, vehicle makers may not allow the repair of bumper covers in or around the location of sensors. Measurements taken from these sensors determine if a signal should be sent to indicate an approaching vehicle and repairs in these areas could hinder sensor performance. Note: Sensors for this system can be sensitive to contamination from items such as dirt, mud, snow, and other debris. The build-up of contaminants over these sensors can result in system malfunction. -Cross-Traffic Alert – some vehicles have cross-traffic alert system that notifies the driver of oncoming traffic when backing out of a parking space. System warnings may include an audible alert from the parking aid speaker, a visual alert on the right or left door mirror, and a message on the instrument panel cluster or infotainment screen. -Cross-Traffic Alert System Parts – the cross-traffic alert system: -Uses many of the same parts as a blind spot detection system, such as sensors located behind the rear bumper cover. -Uses radar that detects an approaching vehicle. -Has sensors that work at a 90-degree angle. -red – Cross- Traffic Alert -yellow – Rear View and Side View Mirror -green – Reverse Sensing System -Parking Assist – parking assist has progressed to the point where most vehicle makers offer the system as an option or standard equipment on their new models. There are two types of parking assist. These include: -Assist only, where the system provides visual and/or audio feedback to help determine the distance to obstacles. -Hands-free parallel parking assist. -Parking Assist – Assist Only – the parking assist system is designed to: -Calculate the distance to an object from the rear of the vehicle. Some systems engage when they detect an object 8 feet (2.4 m) behind the vehicle. -Provide audible and/or visual signals to the driver while parking and maneuvering the vehicle in REVERSE. -Work at low speeds, typically less than 5-11 mph (8-18 km/h). -Note: Some systems may also calculate how close an object is to the front of the vehicle when the vehicle is in DRIVE. Additionally, some systems do not detect objects below the bumper, such as people or pets and can be turned ON/OFF manually using a switch on the instrument panel. -Hands-Free Parallel Parking Assist – some systems have been designed to automatically parallel park the vehicle into an open parking space. The driver only needs to confirm the desired parking space and apply the brakes when required to control speed. The vehicle handles the proper steering. -System Parts – parts that make up the parking assist feature include: -Parking aid sensors, which are located in the bumper covers and used to judge the distance to other parked vehicles. -Parking aid modules-locations vary. -A parking aid speaker that, when the vehicle is in REVERSE, emits an audible beep sound to alert the driver of any obstacles behind the rear of the vehicle. -Cameras that, on some systems, are located in the rear or front to provide a visual of the area around the vehicle. -Hands-Free Parallel Parking Assist Parts – in addition to the parking assist system parts already discussed, there are additional cameras and sensors that are integral parts of the hands-free parallel parking assist system including: -Cameras -Parking assist ECU -Multi-display -Steering angle sensor -Skid control ECU -PARK/NEUTRAL position switch -Display and Navigation -Note: The hands-free parallel parking assist system may utilize cameras mounted in various locations on the vehicle, including the deck lid, tailgate, side mirrors, bumpers, and grille. Identifying damages, other than physical damages, will typically require the use of a scan tool. -Service-Considerations – check parking assist sensors for damage, even after a minor collision. The sensors on the bumpers can typically be refinished. However, excessive coats of refinish can hinder sensor performance. Some vehicle makers do not recommend refinishing sensors with minor finish damage because excessive paint thickness may adversely affect the operation of the parking assist system. Always reference vehicle maker service information to review information for repair or replacement recommendations for parking sensors. Lane Departure Warning, Attention Assist, Adaptive Cruise Control, and Collision Avoidance Systems -Lane Departure Warning – the lane departure warning assist system helps the driver keep the vehicle in the chosen lane. The system uses audio, visual, or steering wheel vibrations to warn the driver that the vehicle is drifting out of the lane. Some systems use the brakes to provide counter steering force to help keep the vehicle in the lane, but other systems may only provide a warning. The lane departure warning assist system typically operates at a speed of 35 mph (56km/h) or above, depending on the vehicle maker, and requires lane markers. -Lane Departure vs. Lane Keeping Assist – lane departure warning system is not activated if the turn signal is engaged before changing lanes. If the system is activated, the warning ends when the driver steers back into the lane, a lane change is completed, the vehicle drives on the line for longer than 2.5 seconds, or if the brake pedal is pressed. Active lane keeping systems alert the driver who is drifting out of a lane and nudge the vehicle back into the lane if the driver does not react. On some models, an icon that shows a vehicle drifting out of its lane indicates if the active lane keeping system is ON or OFF in the vehicle. -System Parts – primary parts of the lane departure warning system may include: -A camera, typically located behind the windshield near the rearview mirror. -A control module. -A lane departure warning ON/OFF switch. -A vibrator motor (if equipped). -The instrument panel cluster. -The radio for warning notification. -Service Considerations – when performing diagnostics and troubleshooting on these systems, it is important to remember road construction or poorly marked roads will prevent proper operation of the lane departure warning system. The lane departure warning system may not accurately detect: -Temporary markings along construction sites that would confuse the system. -Worn or faded road markings. -Road markings covered by snow or ice. -Road markings on roads with sharp bends. -Road markings under very poor weather conditions. -Note: These non-mechanical issues can cause the lane departure warning system to appear not to be operating properly. -Attention Assist – the attention assist system monitors the drivers’ attentiveness and may also be called “drowsy driver” or “driver alert control”. The system uses sensor technology to create an overall driver profile at the beginning of a trip and continuously compares the behavior pattern with real-time data from the sensors throughout the journey. Many of the same parts used for the lane departure warning system are used for attention assist system. These include: -A forward facing camera. -Driver information control module. -Forward sensing control module. -An infotainment module (silences the sound system to provide an audible warning). -A driver information center. -Service Considerations – the attention assist system uses the same camera as the lane departure warning system and may experience similar problems, which may occur from: -Weather and road conditions. -Physical damage to the windshield or camera housing. -Note: For issues other than physical damage, use a scan tool to diagnose the attention assist system. Always reference vehicle maker service information to identify calibration requirements following service of the attention assist system. -Adaptive Cruise Control – the adaptive cruise control (ACC) is an extension of conventional cruise control systems. The ACC system automatically maintains a set distance from a vehicle ahead. The system is not a collision warning or avoidance system; however, parts of the ACC system may be integrated into the collision avoidance systems. The ACC ONLY assists the driver and is not a fully independent driving system. The ACC does enhance driver convenience, since accelerating and braking operations occur without driver intervention. -System Parts – in addition to anti-lock brake system (ABS) and engine control modules, ACC systems use an ACC module to process radar information and determine if a forward vehicle is present. When the ACC system is in “time gap control,” the system sends information to the engine control and brake control modules to control the clearance between the ACC vehicle and the target vehicle. Wheel speed sensors read the speed of the vehicle’s wheel rotation and send the information to the ABS module. The distance sensor is located on the front of the vehicle to detect the presence of a vehicle ahead and the clearance between the ACC vehicle and the forward vehicle. Some distance sensors can be found under or behind the front bumper or behind the grille. -Collision Avoidance – collision avoidance systems detect situations in which a collision may be imminent. The collision avoidance system: -Is designed to predict a collision. -Helps prevent the collision from happening or minimizes the severity. -Can be used to detect front and rear collisions. -Uses forward-object detection with additional information, such as vehicle speeds, to predict an imminent collision. -Note: A properly operating system determines if the distance between vehicles is at a dangerous level and if a collision is about to happen. The system will forewarn the driver (through audible, visual, and/or physical alerts) of a possible collision to prompt the driver to take preventative action. -System Parts – the collision avoidance system: -Is dependent on system options. -Uses radar sensors to detect vehicles in front and behind the vehicle. -Uses a control module that calculates speed, object position, and vehicle tracking. -Note: On some vehicles, detecting vehicles and obstacles in front of the vehicle is determined from information provided by the front millimeter wave radar sensor and an object recognition camera. The millimeter wave radar sensor is also used by the adaptive cruise control system. The object recognition camera consists of two side-by-side cameras typically located in the center front area of the headliner. -Service Considerations – following a collision, always reference vehicle maker service information to identify mandatory system calibrations as it may be necessary to calibrate systems such as the collision avoidance system even if no damage was found to system parts. It is also important to note that servicing system parts such as the radar sensor may require special tools for adjusting and calibrating the radar sensor beam axis. Correct alignment of sensors is necessary to ensure the proper operation of the system. ADAS Diagnostics – When the Calibration Fails Module 1 – Diagnostic Problem Solving for ADAS -Awareness Goal – this course is designed to raise the awareness of technicians and those in the collision repair industry who are impacted by advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS). It is no surprise that today’s vehicles are equipped with sophisticated technologies leading to a future of self-driving vehicles. Understanding the systems, sensors, and how they operate can lead toward more successful diagnostics when you encounter problems. This course introduces you to the complicated topic of diagnostics. It is not designed as a deep dive in the vast ocean of diagnostics. We off you a high-level awareness as a start in your further education. -Diagnostic Technician – the role of a technician has evolved in recent time to include diagnostics. Following a repair, many procedures require sensors to be initialized and/or calibrated. Sensors and modules that have been replaced typically require programming or coding before any calibration. Also, there can be no diagnostic trouble codes (DTCs) related to the system’s operation to perform a calibration, apart from a calibration-related code. If a calibration fails or is incomplete, it is helpful to approach the situation with a problem-solving mindset, that of a diagnostic technician. -Problem-Solving Approach – diagnostic technicians need to have a plan. There are variety of different problem-solving approaches that vehicle makers and diagnostic technicians may use. Although the number of steps and their names may differ, the goal is similar – to have a systematic approach to resolving the problem. This course follows the I-CAR five-step process. -Define the problem -Know the system -Find the cause -Make the repair -Test the system -Define the Problem – start with defining the problem. Lets use an example that a calibration has failed. A description of the problem is that you performed a calibration but received the message that the calibration is not complete. In diagnostics, take a systematic approach. Verify that the problem currently exists. Discover when the problem started. Find out what conditions are present. There is no detail that is too small. Uncover if there are other problems that may connect with the calibration failure. Vehicle makers may have interview sheets to help collect information. -Know the System – a key aspect of knowing a system is research. Review the description and operational information for the system. Part location diagrams, schematics (wiring diagrams), network communication maps, and message charts offer more information. DTC explanations and symptom charts are additional resources you need to be familiar with as you continue with system diagnostics. You should also consider technical service bulletins (TSBs) or other similar resources when you encounter problems. RTS has Collision Repair Diagnostics Definitions and Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) Collision Repair Diagnostics Process for your reference as well. Do the research early in the diagnostic process. -ADAS Sensors Overview – having an understanding about each sensor that informs the ADAS in the repair is invaluable. Sensors may be ultrasonic, radar, cameras, or LiDAR. Lets learn more about the sensor types. Video …… -Other Vehicle Sensors – there are many additional sensors on the vehicle that are required for the operation of other systems. Sensors such as steering angle sensors (SAS), wheel speed sensors, yaw rate sensors, and many others are connected to a variety of vehicle electronic systems. These sensors gather data for the systems to which they are connected. That data may also be shared with the ADAS. Any inaccuracy or problems with this sensor data can adversely affect the primary system the sensor reports to as well as ADAS and other systems. For example, something as simple as an SAS that is out of calibration can have a domino effect on a variety of systems. -Invisible ADAS Communication – lets continue in our problem-solving process to know the system. ADAS communication is not something we can see. We should deepen our understanding of the communication process among the various sensors and systems in the ADAS and vehicle communication networks. -Parts of the ADAS Network – some ADAS features may be relatively independent of other vehicle systems; however, most are not. The word “network” is important to consider. The parts of the ADAS are interconnected to a larger vehicle communications or system. What happens to individual systems may impact what happens within the other systems on the network as well. The parts that comprise the ADAS network include the sensors, computers, and the vehicle parts, or actuators, that act on the directions. We have already learned about some of the ADAS sensors. They gather data about the surroundings and vehicle operational conditions or inputs. The inputs stream to computer software that processes the data. -Computer Modules and Actuators – system modules and certain parts have data transceivers which receive and transmit information over the communication network, connecting the vehicle systems. A node is a module, sensor, or other device connected to the controller area network (CAN) bus. The commanded outputs from an ADAS may be sent to other systems. This communication may activate warning devices for some systems or request actions like increase or decrease powertrain torque, apply brakes, and steer left or right. -ADAS Network – that ADAS network involves a chain of communication that is interdependent. Each part influences the operation of a system. Many systems work together sharing data to make decisions affecting the actions taken by the different systems. Inaccurate data from one sensor may not only affect the system, but it may affect many systems. The ADAS commonly interact with: -Powertrain control module (PCM) -Anti-lock braking system (ABS) -Supplemental restraint system (SRS) -Electronic power steering (EPS) -Body control module (BCM) -Note: Depending on the vehicle and its features, there may be interactions with additional systems. -Sensor Function – each sensor that contributes inputs to ADAS has its strengths but also weaknesses. Sensor fusion is the concept of bringing together the information from more than one sensor and/or system and using that combined data to better inform the vehicle systems. Sensor fusion builds a stronger data set, enabling increased system performance or capabilities. -Sensor Fusion Example – sensor fusion provides awareness of the situation. For example, a forward-facing camera may be used to fill the gap by radar and ultrasonic sensors, so lines, signs, and other objects can be identified. Sensor fusion combines the data to attempt an accurate reading of the circumstances surrounding the vehicle. Radar may detect an object. The camera also sees the object. Object-recognition image processing may be able to determine what it is, distinguishing between a person and a bicycle. -Complicated Processing – on some ADAS, the data collected by a sensor may be processed within that unit. That unit issues commands on the CAN bus for programmed warnings or actions. The relevant modules on that network receive the messages and act accordingly. In other cases, the data from one ADAS sensor/module may be sent to a different ADAS sensor/module for analysis and processing. This module uses decision-making algorithms which are programmed rules for processing data to validate objects and threat level. Based on the system programming and information collected, the system sends out warnings or action requests on the communication network as determined appropriate. -Dedicated ADAS Control Module – some system designs use a dedicated ADAS control module. The information collected by the sensors is sent to the dedicated ADAS control module which is responsible for analyzing and processing the inputs and issuing output commands. -Crucial Knowledge – this is only a glimpse into the ADAS communication network. You will need to fully understand the systems for the vehicle on which you are working by researching the vehicle maker service information. By knowing the system, performing the research, and completing more diagnostics, you will grow in your understanding and expertise. -What Could Go Wrong in Communication – armed with the knowledge about ADAS and vehicle communication, you can begin to find the cause in the problem-solving process. As you diagnose and problem-solve, consider the power, ground, and data communications. Ask yourself, “are communications happening? Is there something hindering communications?”. Typically, troubleshooting is enhanced with flowcharts that guide you through a process of inspecting, testing, and eliminating the possible variables. Decision trees walk you down a diagnostic path. -Communication Busses – technicians do not write the code or messages, but they must flow for the system to operate. Message transfer issues may include. -Shorts between CAN bus lines or other wiring -Short-to-power or ground -Opens or a break in the wiring/connectors -Issues with a module or part on the CAN bus that is corrupting or interfering with communications. -Note: As other sensors or modules are introduced in vehicle design, there may be additional communication busses used to support the data transfer between sensors, modules, and systems. In some cases, these are private, dedicated, CAN busses. -Other Diagnostic Tools – a scan tool and vehicle diagnostic software may have the capability to provide a graphic representation of the communication network topology. There may be a color-coding system for module status, identifying which nodes are communicating as designed or if there are problems. This process assists in finding what is corrupt and viewing what is present. It works as an electronic roll call checking in to see who is present and working. As a diagnostic technician, you may need to use a lab scope to analyze the signals on the CAN bus. This is to identify possible problems during diagnostics where no or intermittent communication is happening. -System Data – when conducting ADAS diagnostics, it can be beneficial to look at system data which may identify values associated with certain parameters or the state of inputs and outputs. This may be referred to as live data or parameter identification (PIDs) that request data from a module or system. This is done using a scan tool connected to the vehicle. When following a diagnostic flowchart, the technician may be guided to view certain data within a system and compare that to known, normal values or identified current conditions. There may also be further testing or adjustments based on the results. -Finding the Cause – as a diagnostic technician, you need to gather information about the vehicle and the circumstances that brought it before you. Start with the basics and assume nothing. This process involves questions that uncover facts to help find the cause. -What is the repair history? -Were there repairs in the vicinity of a sensor? -Did the vehicle have suspension, alignment, or structural work? -Have you personally done a visual inspection? -Were all preconditions met before the calibration was attempted? -Were all calibration procedures carried out properly? -Are there DTCs, or is there some other indication of a problem? -Are there any non-OEM accessories installed? These could be body, chassis, or communication network-related modifications. -Visual Inspection – do a visual inspection. What do you see? Are the wires and connectors in good condition? Wire and connector issues will likely set DTCs. Is something interfering with the way the sensor sees the world of impeding its ability to see the world clearly and correctly? If the radar mounts behind the emblem on the grille, was the correct emblem installed? Was the windshield replaced? Did the glass installer use OEM-approved glass? Look at the sensor mounting locations. Are they properly oriented with the correct side of the sensor facing out? A sensor or camera can only gather information based on how it is mounted. Is there a hidden repair that may not be immediately visible such as on a bumper cover? -Diagnostics with DTCs – if there are DTCs, you need to understand what they mean and how they affect the system. Research the DTCs. Service information has flowchart-type information and diagnostic decision trees to guide you through the inspection and testing process to arrive at the root cause. If there are network communication error codes, correct them first. Some DTCs may point to an aiming or calibration issue or to some electronic system or circuit issue. Where codes appear in multiple systems, you need to understand how the systems communicate with one another. You also need to know how this affects the operation of the different systems in order to prioritize your diagnostic approach. Diagnostic tools and/or service information may provide additional resources to help you prioritize how you move forward. -DTC Trends and Patterns – when diagnosing multiple DTCs, as you review the list of codes, look for any trends or patterns that may help identify a common root cause. For example, if the anti-lock brake controller was not communicating, there would likely be a number of other modules reporting a “no communication” code. The pattern that the ABS controller is not reporting is a trend worth investigating. -Diagnostics with No DTCs – if there are no DTCs, your approach may involve using symptom charts. Some steps in a symptom chart require visual inspection of the vehicle, system, and/or parts. It may require some disassembly for complete inspection. As you work to find the cause, the symptom chart may require testing for power, ground, communications, and specific pinpoint tests. In the process, additional testing of other systems or parts may be identified, including the use of the diagnostic scan tool, DVOM, and other test equipment. Typical elements of symptom charts may be: -Symptom condition descriptions -A list of possible causes -Next steps such as inspections, test, or corrective actions. -Unobstructed View – lets consider a blind spot radar on the quarter panel, hidden by the bumper cover. The radar must be able to transmit and receive through the cover without any distortion or loss of signal strength. In situations where the radar will not calibrate, visually inspect the sensor. Then, consider calibrating without the cover. Did it calibrate? What was the difference? You are not done yet. This just eliminated a possible cause. Was the cover repaired or refinished? The final calibration must be done with a properly refinished bumper in place. Finding the cause is a repetitive process in which you ask questions and then confirm or deny the information. Continue through this cycle until you find the root cause. -Make the Repair – the next step is to make the repair. This is probably the shortest duration in the entire process. A solution may be to replace a bent bracket or correct the sensor mounting orientation. Another solution may be to correct an obstruction in the view of the sensor. When carrying out repairs, always follow the OEM repair instructions. Documentation is important for every step. -Wiring and Electronics Solutions – if the problem was with communications, it may be with the wiring, a connector, or a module that needs to be corrected. If any parts have been replaced, proper coding, programming, and/or initializations must be done. Part of the solution could be replacing a faulty module. Typically, this is only done after you have eliminated all other possible causes, or there is a specific code indicating internal module failure. Other wire or connector damage identified on any part of the system or supporting systems needs to be corrected. -Test the System – as a diagnostic technician, you must test the system as part of the process. After the repairs are complete and the systems are properly calibrated, make a thorough test drive part of your routine. You must evaluate the performance of each of the ADAS features, as well as all other aspects of the vehicle, to ensure it will perform as designed. Your customers have entrusted their vehicle to you for complete and safe repairs. Always aim for 100% accuracy. -Knowledge Investment – diagnosing and repairing the system problems can range from relatively simple sensor alignment corrections to complex network diagnostics and testing, depending on the true root cause. With the right tools, equipment, information resources, and knowledge, you will gain proficiency over time. The world of diagnostics is an ever-changing landscape. It is no different than the evolution of the vehicle and its future. Investing the time to further advance your knowledge and skills is an investment in your professional future. Invest wisely. Adhesive Bonding (1/2) -Adhesives for the Collision Repair Industry – Adhesives have been used in the collision repair industry for years, and their use is expanding. Vehicle makers are using adhesives in a variety of wars, from something as small as a sensor to something as large as structural components. Many performance vehicles are manufactured using lightweight composite materials to reduce vehicle weight. These composite materials cannot be welded together and mechanical fasteners would add weight. The use of adhesives allows these materials to be joined together easily. Another advantage to using adhesives is they help absorb vibration and common road impact forces. -Who Repairs with Adhesives – vehicle makers commonly use adhesives in many different ways including -Panel Bonding -Rivet Bonding -Structural Bonding -Weld Bonding -* It is important to always reference vehicle maker repair information to identify repair requirements and procedures. It’s not uncommon for a vehicle to be manufactured using one joining process and repaired using a different joining process. We can’t assume that using the same method a vehicle maker uses to assemble a vehicle is the correct and recommended method to repair collision damage. -General Characteristics – characteristics of adhesive include the ability to cure relatively quickly at room temperature, strength, impact resistance, and substrate preparation requirements that are different than typically required when welding, riveting, or bolts parts together. You can find the specific characteristics of the adhesive on the technical data sheet. -Types of Adhesives – depending on the adhesive maker, material may be available in volumes of 6 oz to 13 oz. One-part adhesives are packaged as a single tube. Two-part adhesives are packaged as two tubes and are dispensed together through a single mixing tip. These adhesives are available from the vehicle maker or from aftermarket product supplies -Urethane-Based – urethanes are typically one-part materials. One-part urethanes cure with the presence of moisture. Two-part urethanes chemically cure and can be accelerated with heat. -Acrylic-Based – Acrylic-based adhesives are typically two-part materials that cure by chemical reaction. Acrylics cure faster than urethanes and epoxy-based materials. * Some adhesive makers may refer to their acrylic-based products as methacrylate -Epoxy-Based – the image shows an epoxy-based adhesive. Epoxies are two-part materials that cure by a chemical reaction and can have their cure rate accelerated with heat. -Combination – this image shows a combination, or hybrid, product using urethane and epoxy bases. Some adhesive makers have products that combine bases like urethane and epoxy to meet specific applications. -Mixing Tips – mixing tips are product- and material-specific and should not be switched between brands or material types. These materials are chemically unique and may be mixed at different rates. If not properly mixed, an inadequate repair may occur from an incorrect cure or mixing rate. Some mixing tips use different length augers. For example, some companies use mixing tips for expandable two-part foams that will fit on their two-part adhesive materials, and the only different between the mixing tip is the length of the auger. In that case, mark the mixing tips to indicate the appropriate product. -Directions for Using Adhesives – when working with adhesives always reference vehicle maker service information to identify product and application requirements. If the required adhesive is labeled from the vehicle maker, follow the instructions provided by the vehicle maker. The vehicle maker may recommend following the product maker instructions for part preparation and some application considerations. In this situation, make a note in the repair file that vehicle maker procedures were used. -Non-OEM Label – if the required adhesive is not vehicle maker labeled, follow the adhesive maker’s recommendations. -File Documentation – you should record the name, part, and lot number of the materials used for the repair. This can be done by writing the information on the repair order, or by removing the label from the used cartridge, attaching it to a sheet of paper, and placing it in the customer’s file. Retaining this type of information may prove helpful if there is a product recall or legal action regarding the repair. -Panel Bonding Methods – when using adhesive during the repair process, vehicle makers will typically require a specific bonding procedure. -Adhesive-Only Repairs – an adhesive-only repair does not use welds, rivets, or other mechanical fasteners. Anchor welds may be required in certain areas for adhesive-only repairs. These typically include roof skins and quarter panels. Anchor welds are welds that are typically located at the corners of a part and help keep a part from being peeled off the vehicle. When performing an adhesive-only repair, some benefits may include -Corrosion resistance -No heat being introduced into the repair area -The ability to reposition a part after attachment and clamping -No mechanical fasteners, such as bolts and rivets -* Always refer to vehicle maker service information to identify approved repair methods, adhesive materials, and required bonding techniques. -Repairs with Welds and Adhesives – some vehicle makers require using welds and adhesive. Using adhesives and welds is called weld bonding. Depending on who supplies the reattachment procedure, the part may be attached using bonding and either GMA plug weld or spot welds. -Repairs with Rivets and Adhesives – some vehicle makers require using rivets and adhesive. Using adhesives and rivets is called rivet bonding. Many aluminum-intensive vehicles use rivet bonding on both structural and non-structural locations on the vehicle. -Adhesive vs Cohesive Failure – not using the adhesive in a manner instructed by the adhesive maker can cause the adhesive to fail prematurely. There are two types of failure: adhesive and cohesive. Adhesive failure on the left. Cohesive failure on the right -Adhesive Failure – adhesive failure is when the adhesive does not hold to substrates such as bare metal, primer, or topcoats. To help prevent adhesive failure, always work with clean surfaces that are prepared following the adhesive maker’s instructions. If a substrate is not abraded properly, or if the bonding surface is not free of contaminants, adhesive failure can result. -Cohesive Failure – cohesive failure is when the adhesive fails to remain intact with itself. An example of cohesive failure would be two parts separating with the adhesive remaining attached to both substrates. Causes of cohesive failure include: -The adhesive has expired -The recommended work time is exceeded -The cure time has been accelerated too aggressively -Properly Storing Adhesives – it is important to store and dispose of adhesives properly in order to ensure good repairs and comply with regulations -Storage Guidelines – to ensure maximum shelf life, store adhesives in a clean, dry area at 65-85 degrees F and out of direct sunlight. Both one- and two-part adhesives should be stored in relatively low humidity. Acrylic and urethane adhesives are moisture-sensitive and must be protected from relatively high humidity. To protect adhesives from humidity, do not open the product package until the product will be used. Store partially used adhesives with the mixing tip attached to the cartridge. Some adhesive makers recommend removing the mixing tip and replacing it with the original packaging plug. Store any partially used cartridges in an airtight plastic bag. -Shelf Life – adhesives are usually guaranteed for 6-12 months from the date of purchase depending on the adhesive maker. This is known as shelf life. After a product has been opened, the shelf life will be reduced. To ensure quality, keep a minimum inventory of opened products. If an adhesive maker recommends that the cartridge be stored with the nozzle end down, it may be to keep air from entering the cartridges. If an adhesive maker recommends that the cartridges be stored upright, it may be to keep any air in the cartridges at the top so it can be purged easily. -Disposal – if an adhesive shelf life has expired, discard the material. If a product is being discarded, non-dispensed products are considered hazardous waste. To dispose of the material so it is considered nonhazardous waste, dispense the product and let it cure. When the material changes state to a solid, it is typically not considered a hazardous material. * When disposing of adhesive, always refer to the Safety Data Sheet (SDS), and follow local, state, and national environmental control methods. Cured adhesives may be disposed of as non-hazardous waste. -Adhesive-Only Process – when performing an adhesive-only repair, lap joints are used. A lap joint is one substrate resting parallel and in contact with another substrate. With this type of repair the adhesive is the only material holding the parts together. An exception to this would be a hemmed flange, such as a door skin or quarter panel, that also helps to lock the panel in place. The arrow is the overlap area. Replacement part on the top, original part on the bottom -Adhesive-Only Considerations – some benefits of doing adhesive-only bonding include corrosion resistance, no heat being introduced to the repair zone, the ability to reposition a part after attachment and clamping compared to mechanical fastening methods, and no mechanical fasteners such as rivets. Before performing this type of repair, always reference vehicle maker repair information to ensure this type of repair is approved by the vehicle maker. Most vehicle makers have an approved procedure for this type of repair when replacing door skins, but there is limited acceptance of this type of repair with structural parts. -Vehicle Application Examples – some examples of parts where vehicle makers may approve the use of adhesive-only include -Roof panels -Quarter panels -Door skins -Rear body panels -Stationary glass -Trim -Floor pans -* Not all vehicle makers approve the use of adhesives. Even with those that do, if adhesive is recommended for a specific part, those guidelines should not necessarily be applied to the same part on a different model. -Wet or Work Time – wet or work time is the time between when the adhesive is applied to when the parts must be attached and clamped in place. A weak bond may result if the panel is installed, repositioned, or clamped to the substrate after the wet time has expired. For most adhesives, wet time is specified at 50% relative humidity and 70 degrees F. This time is halved for every 20 degrees F increase and doubled for every 20 degrees F decrease. If the bond is not made before the wet time expires, the adhesive must be removed and reapplied, because the adhesive may begin to dry and not adequately “bite” into, or adhere to, the substrate. * Some adhesive makers say that the wet time is starting to expire when the adhesive changes color as it cures. -Clamp or Handling Time – clamp or handling time is the required time that parts must remain joined with pressure applied. This time is not part of wet time and is commonly less than cure time. There may be situations when an adhesive maker lists an unclamp time. Unclamp time is when the clamps can be removed from the part, but the part should not be placed into service. Unclamp time is before the cure time has been reached. * The part should not be placed in service when clamp time expires. This includes installing a part on a vehicle and then raising the vehicle on a hoist before the cure time has been reached. -Cure Time – cure time is the specific time required for an adhesive to dry or set at a specific temperature (typically 70 degrees F or 21 degrees Celsius) and humidity. When an adhesive cures, the material changes state. Only after the material cures should the part be placed in service. Two-part adhesives cure by a chemical reaction that occurs when mixing the two materials: -A resin -A hardener, or catalyst -Forced Curing – some adhesive makers allow force curing two-part adhesives to decrease the cure time. Force curing with heat is not allowed on most two-part acrylic adhesives because the heat breaks down the chemical structure of the adhesive. When allowed, force curing can be done using heat from an infrared heat lamp, heat gun, temperature-controlled spraybooth, etc. when using heat to shorten cure time, follow the product maker’s instructions. Do not heat bonded parts with an open flame. -Corrosion Protection of the Flange Area – adhesives that do not require a primer to the bond area are commonly available for bonding metal parts. These adhesives are designed to be applied to bare metal areas, and protect against corrosion. These adhesives must cover all of the bare metal to provide protection. Failure to cover all bare metal surfaces will result in corrosion that could creep under the adhesive and cause an adhesive failure. When working with an adhesive that requires a primer, clean the mating surfaces and apply a primer before applying the adhesive. -Adhesives Not Requiring a Primer – to apply adhesives with corrosion-resistance properties to bare-metal mating surface -1) apply a ¼ to 3/8 inch bead of adhesive to the bond areas of all parts -2) smooth the adhesive bead along the entire area to be bonded using a plastic spreader. Make sure all bare metal bonding areas are covered to ensure proper corrosion protection -3) if necessary, apply an additional adhesive bead to the inside edge of the replacement panel, or to the flange on the vehicle structure. The additional bead ensures adequate bond-line thickness, and reduces the possibilities of air bubbles in the adhesive bead -4) install the part -Adhesives Requiring a Primer – when working with an adhesive that requires primed mating surfaces -1) begin with coated flanges as recommended by the adhesive maker -2) apply a ¼ to 3/8 inch bead of adhesive to either the replacement panel flange or the vehicle flange -3) do not smooth the adhesive bead. Allow the adhesive to cover the joint from the pressure applied at the repair joint -4) assemble and clamp the parts together. When applying clamping pressure, glass beads inside the adhesive help control over-clamping -Applying Adhesives – when applying adhesive to a part, the adhesives should be applied in a continuous non-breaking bead overlapping at the start and stop locations of the bead. Be sure the bead is of uniform size around the panel on the bonding area and is applied around the holes on a part to provide proper bonding strength -Bond-Line Thickness – bond-line thickness is the thickness of the cured adhesive in the joint. If the bond line is too large, some areas of the adhesive may cure quicker than others because of the heat generated by the adhesive. To ensure proper bond-line thickness, some adhesives contain glass beads to prevent a bond line that is too thin. Adhesives used for plastics, and a few products used for steel, do not contain glass beads. When working with these types of materials, shims may be required to create a proper bond-line thickness. When unsure about the adhesive being used, refer to the adhesive maker’s recommendations for maintaining a consistent and specific bond-line thickness Adhesive Bonding Considerations -Cleaning the Flange Area – for bonding procedures that use epoxy or acrylic adhesives, remove all of the original adhesive and clean the mating flange area using: -A plastic-coated abrasive wheel to remove any remaining adhesive, corrosion, E-coat, or other substances. -The recommended grit sandpaper to remove the weld nuggets and galvanizing -* Do not use grinding tools that may reduce metal thickness. Some adhesive makers recommend applying metal adhesives to properly prepare bare metal. * After panel removal and cleaning, straighten the mating flanges to create a flat bonding surface. -Applying Primer as Required – during the panel removal process, the mating surfaces may have been scratched. If called for by the adhesive maker, cover scratches with a corrosion-resistance primer. Depending on the adhesive, the adhesive maker may recommend applying a corrosion-resistant primer to the bonding area of the panels. Regardless of the bonding process, always refer to the technical data sheet and follow the specific steps provided. When choosing a corrosion-resistance primer, refer to the adhesive maker for the recommended type of product to use. -Part Attachment – when attaching adhesively bonded parts with two-part adhesive -1) assemble the parts and clamp them into position so they do not move -2) if necessary, reposition the parts by sliding. If a part is lifted, air bubbles can become trapped inside the adhesive. If the parts are lifted, the adhesive must be removed and reapplied. 3) secure the mating parts as soon as possible. Some tools that can be used for securing panels include clamps, locking pliers, and fasteners, such as clecos, rivets, or threaded fasteners. -Steps Following Assembly – after attaching the panel -Clean any excess adhesive by scraping, grinding with a plastic-coated abrasive wheel, or by using a towel dampened with adhesive remover. Do not apply adhesive remover directly to the bonded part, as doing this can weaken the strength of the bond. -Apply body filler, if necessary, following the required clamping or handling time. -Begin the preparation steps for refinishing. A/C Systems Operation and Damage Analysis Basic A/C Systems Operation -Basic A/C Systems Operation and Refrigerant Flow – to understand air conditioning (A/C) systems, it is important to know how refrigerant removes heat from the vehicle’s passenger cabin. Air conditioning systems are considered closed loop systems that leverage the properties of refrigerant when it changes state. By controlling refrigerant pressure in the system, the state can be changed from a gaseous state to a liquid state and from a liquid state back to a gaseous state. As the state of refrigerant changes, heat is absorbed when it changes from a liquid state to a gaseous state, and heat is released when it changes from a gaseous state to a liquid state. Most A/C Systems in modern vehicles have electric controls for user demand requests. On-board vehicle communications networking is used to send the request to turn on the compressor and fans, as well as monitor a variety of sensors for system pressures, temperatures, and other parameters. If the A/C system is inoperative, a scan tool will be required to retrieve DTCs and perform diagnostics. This course will focus on refrigerant flow and related A/C system parts. There are two common system types that will be discussed. -Accumulator A/C – -Receiver/Drier System Accumulator A/C System Operation and Damage Analysis -PCM and Other Computer Modules – the PCM or some other computer module may be used to monitor the high and low side pressure sensors as well as other system sensors, and is used to command clutch engagement and compressor operation as well as cooling fan operation, usually through relays. The heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) control head or multi-function control panel sends the request for A/C to the PCM and may monitor the outside air temperature. -A/C Systems Inspection and Testing – when inspecting an A/C system, a visual inspection of the system should be done to identify any obvious breach in the system parts. If no obvious issues are found, turn the system on to verify the system is cooling properly and the blower motor and cooling fans are working. This may include measuring the air temperature at the outlet vents on the dash, and comparing the readings to information found in the service manual. If the engine cannot be started, manifold gauges can be used to identify whether or not the system has a charge. Regardless of whether or not the system is operating properly, it should be used to identify whether or not the system has a charge. Dye may be present or added to the system and monitored to identify slow leaks. Fittings and joints are the most common areas for leaks to occur. When inspecting for leaks, inspect these points first. Refrigerant is heavier than air, so be sure to use a sniff tester to “sniff” the lower areas of the part being tested. Modern systems have smaller refrigerant charges compared to older systems and are more sensitive to refrigerant charge issues. It is important that the correct amount of clean refrigerant is in the system for proper operation. -Compressor Operation and Damage Analysis – the compressor is used to create flow, and change the pressure of the refrigerant in the A/C system. -Compressor Operation – refrigerant enters the compressor as a low-pressure gas and exits as a high-pressure gas. On most vehicles, the compressor uses a belt and pulley with a clutch to externally drive the compressor, allowing visual verification of operation. Some belt-driven compressors are variable displacement and may not use a clutch. The compressor requires oil for lubrication. The oil travels through the A/C system with the refrigerant. Electric vehicles and some hybrid-electric vehicles use an electrically driven compressor. -Compressor Damage Analysis – depending on the design of the system, the A/C compressor may require removal to allow access for inspection. Electric compressors should be carefully inspected for damage to the case and wiring. Do not touch any of the high voltage wiring, connectors, or parts unless the high voltage system has been disarmed and it has been verified there is no shock hazard present. When inspecting an A/C compressor for damage or to determine repair ability: -Inspect the clutch and pulley. These parts may be replaced individually or as a unit. If the clutch or pulley is damaged, inspect the shaft and seal for damage or signs of leakage -Inspect whether the compressor engages and disengages when the system is activated, and as the system pressures increase and decrease -Inspect the attachment points of the refrigerant lines -Inspect the pressure relief valve, switches, and wiring for broken insulation or shorted wires -Inspect the compressor case for signs of impact. Impact could cause internal damage, leaks, or other problems. -Inspect the brackets that attach the compressor to the engine -Determine what oil is required by the vehicle maker before doing repairs. Using the wrong oil will lead to inadequate protection and premature part failure -Note: If the compressor pully is in close proximity to a frame rail or other parts, inspect it for possible impact marks -High-Pressure Relief Valve – -High-pressure relief valves can be located in many areas on the high side. Common locations are on the: -High-side line -Receiver/drier -Back of the compressor -High-pressure relief valves vent refrigerant if excessively high pressures are sensed to prevent compressor damage. When a high-pressure relief valve has released pressure from the system, there is normally a visual indicator, such as a piece of tape being blown off the valve, indicating that high pressures were reached at some time. Some systems may contain an electrical control that prevents the high-pressure relief valve from venting refrigerant into the atmosphere. These systems may use a: -Single contact switch that disengages the clutch and shuts down the compressor -Dual contact switch that turns the cooling fan to high in an attempt to increase the airflow and heat transfer at the condenser -Compressor shutdown switch that disengages the clutch and prevents internal damage to the compressor -Condenser – Refrigerant enters the condenser as a high-pressure gas and exits as a high-pressure liquid. The condenser: -Changes the state of the refrigerant through condensation and heat exchange. -Releases the heat that was taken from the passenger compartment into the atmosphere -Condenser Characteristics – some A/C systems may have a secondary condenser, or sub-condenser, to provide additional heat transfer. Many R-134a systems use a parallel flow condenser as shown here -Condenser Damage Analysis – when inspecting a condenser for damage: -Depending on the severity of the damage, straightening may be possible -Bent fins may be straightened by combing. If the condenser tubes are damaged, there are typically no repair options besides complete part replacement -Determine if there is any refrigerant in the system. To do this, attach manifold gauges to the A/C system service ports. Note: If this is being done, a certified A/C technician is required to work on systems containing A/C refrigerant -Do not automatically anticipate loss of refrigerant when a vehicle has been in a collision. Depending on the damage and type of impact, an A/C system may retain its charge -Evaporator – evaporators absorb the passenger compartment heat and leave behind cool, dehumidified air to be circulated in the passing er compartment. The refrigerant enters the evaporator as a low-pressure mist and exits as a low-pressure gas. The evaporator: -Uses the evaporation process to absorb heat from the passenger compartment -Removes humidity as the warm passenger compartment air contacts the cooler evaporator -Feels cold to the touch while the heat exchange is taking place -Evaporator Designs – most evaporator designs include: -Tube-and-fin (single, round tubes zig-zagging back and forth through a pattern of fins) -Serpentine (flat tubes with fins winding between them) -Plate-and-fin (a series of plates with various paths) -Note: Refrigerant flow through tube-and-fin and serpentine evaporators can be seen by inspecting how the tubing is routed. There is typically only one path for the refrigerant to flow, unlike the plate-and-fin design, which has multiple paths. -Evaporator Damage Analysis – when inspecting an evaporator, look for dye or oil leaking from the condensate drain on the passenger’s side cowl/under body, indicating a leak. Due to their location in the dash panel, fin or tube damage as well as collision damage is not common, but may be caused by stress placed on A/C lines or indirect through the body to the evaporator housing. Evaporators are not easily accessible and are usually inspected last. Dirt and debris can accumulate on the evaporator and lead to corrosion and leaks in certain situations. Note: If engine coolant is leaking from the condensate drain, the heater core is likely bad. -Orifice Tubes – orifice tubes are found on A/C systems equipped with accumulators. -Refrigerant Changes – a change in refrigerant pressure and state occurs as the refrigerant passes through the orifice tube. The refrigerant enters the orifice tube as a high-pressure liquid, passes through the orifice tube, and exits as a low-pressure mist -Damage Analysis – orifice tubes may be located at the condenser outlet or in the line leading to the evaporator inlet and may be damaged if the encapsulating part is damaged or if there has been a part failure in the system or if other contaminants caused the orifice tube filter screen to clog. When replacing orifice tubes, it is important to order the correct size and that it is installed with the arrow in the direction of refrigerant flow. Orifice tubes have a variety of inlet end designs that may require specialized removal tools or a tool attachment -Accumulator – a system with an accumulator has a fixed orifice tube. Refrigerant enters and exits the accumulator as a low-pressure gas. The accumulator is not used to change the state or the pressure of the refrigerant in an A/C system -Accumulator Characteristics – -Are located on the low side of the air conditioning system, right before the refrigerant returns to the compressor, typically at the evaporator outlet. -Are found on systems with fixed metering, such as an orifice tube. Since orifice tubes are in-line part, an accumulator may act as an indication that an orifice tube location should be identified during problem-solving -Use an internal desiccant material to remove moisture from the refrigerant as it passes through -Act as a storage area for excess liquid refrigerant -Prevent liquid from entering the compressor and damaging it. Liquid cannot be compressed -May contain an external pressure cycling switch. This switch monitors pressures and cycles the compressor on and off as necessary -Accumulator or Receiver/Drier Damage Analysis – accumulator or receiver/drier replacement recommendations vary. Accumulators and receiver/driers typically require replacement following collision repairs when the system has been open for an extended period of time. Additional evacuation time may be needed for R-134a systems. Moisture is a contaminant and can cause corrosion and insufficient cooling problems. The refrigerant oil in R-134a systems absorbs moisture and extra evacuation time will help remove the moisture. Note: Check vehicle maker service information for specific replacement requirements -Pressure Switches – there are three different cutoff switches used in an A/C system -High-Pressure Cutoff Switch – high-pressure cutoff switches disengage the compressor clutch when excessively high pressures are sensed. High-pressure cutoff switches can be located throughout the A/C system. The most common locations are on: -The high-side line -The compressor discharge muffler -The back of the compressor -Low-Pressure Cutoff Switch – low-pressure cutoff switches cycle the compressor clutch when low pressures are sensed and will not allow the compressor clutch to engage, preventing damage to the A/C system. Low-pressure cutoff switches can be located throughout the A/C system. The most common locations are on the low-side line, accumulator, H-valve, and back of the compressor -High/Low-Pressure Cutoff Switch – a high/low-pressure cutoff switch is a combination of a high-pressure and a low-pressure cutoff switch. The dual function switch prevents compressor operation at both high and low pressures. It may also control fan operation on some systems. The high/low pressure cutoff switch: -Is commonly located on the high-side or low-side line -Controls the compressor operation to prevent compressor and system damage from excessively high or low pressures -Disengages the clutch at specific minimum and maximum pressures that are set from the factory for that system. The vehicle maker specifications should be checked for exact measurements -Switches and Sensors Damage Analysis – the pressure switches and sensors on the high and low side of the A/C system: -Should be inspected for physical damage to the switch, sensors, connectors, or wires -May require evacuating the refrigerant in the system before replacement -Have replaceable O-rings -Should be inspected for physical damage to the switch or wire damage that could cause the system to operate incorrectly or be damaged -Lines and Hoses Damage Analysis – when inspecting lines and hoses: -Kinks in aluminum or rubber lines may affect system performance -Any damaged lines should not be repaired, they should be replaced. Typically, A/C service ports are located on the high- and low-side pressure lines -Fans – airflow moving through the condenser is required to remove heat from refrigerant and to allow for A/C system peak performance. The engine and radiator cooling fans are typically the primary airflow source when stationary or moving at low speeds. Additional airflow may be created with fans located in front of the condenser pushing air through it. Electric fans are most common and typically controlled by the PCM as needed. When fans are positioned in front of the condenser, the fans push air through the condenser. Pushing fans may be used when sufficient airflow cannot be obtained with air deflectors or airflow through the grille. When fans are positioned behind the condenser, the fans pull the air through. Fans in an A/C system: -Can be mechanical or electric -Are used to direct airflow through the condenser. This assists the heat transfer in the condenser -Provide airflow. Airflow is needed for the condenser to remove the heat absorberd from the passenger compartment from the refrigerant and release it into the atmosphere -May be single or dual -Function differently depending how they are positioned around the condenser -Directing Airflow – aerodynamic vehicle designs have increased the need for sufficient airflow through the condenser. Sufficient airflow is needed for the condenser to release the heat removed from the passenger compartment. It is important to repair and/or replace all air ducting and seals to maintain sufficient airflow if they are damaged or removed. Reduction in grille size has increased the need for assisting the fan with: -Foam seals -Air dams -Shrouds -Note: Active grille shutters may also affect A/C system performance if they are not opening at the appropriate times -In-Line Filters – in-line filters are not typically installed by the vehicle maker and may indicate service work has been performed. They are designed to trap small particles that may be flowing through the system and prevent particle build-up in the orifice tube and other parts. They may contain an orifice tube and additional filters and are usually found on the high pressure side of the system. In-line filters are located in the high-side, liquid line. The refrigerant is filtered through and contaminants are trapped. These filters may be installed after a part failure, such as a compressor, to trap and contaminants that may be remaining in the system Receiver/Drier A/C Systems Operation and Damage Analysis -Receiver/Drier A/C System Parts Function -Parts that are found on a receiver/drier-based system include: -A receiver/drier -A variable metering valve -Standard A/C system parts include: -The compressor -The evaporator -The condenser -Receiver/Drier – a receiver/drier works the same way as an accumulator, the difference being their locations. Refrigerant enters and exits as a high-pressure liquid. Receiver/driers: -Are located on the high-side (liquid) line after the condenser -Are found on systems with variable metering. Variable metering includes expansion valves and H-valve systems -Utilize desiccant material to remove moisture from the system. Moisture can damage the system and cause insufficient cooling -May store extra refrigerant like accumulators -May have a sight glass on top -Note: The receiver dryer may be separate or built into the condenser -Metering Valves: Expansion Valve and H-Valve – a metering valve changes the high-pressure liquid into low-pressure mist. Two types of metering valves include expansion valves and H-valves. The two types are used on different systems but serve the same purpose -Additional Parts – the accumulator and receiver/drier systems utilize many similar parts, which typically include: -A clutch -A high-pressure relief valve -A high/low-pressure cutoff -A PCM -An A/C relay -A fan relay -Relays – relays are used in the A/C system to control the compressor clutch and the condenser fan(s). the relays are typically controlled by the PCM. The fan relay is usually energized when the air conditioning is engaged and when engine coolant temperature gets high enough. Relays are commonly located in power distribution boxes under the hood, but may be in a different location. When performing damage analysis, inspect for physical damage as well as electrical function, damaged relays should be replaced. It may be possible to monitor or command relay operation with a scan tool to check clutch or fan operation Refrigerant and Oils -Refrigerant Qualities – refrigerant requires qualities that allow it to be used effectively in an A/C system. Refrigerants must be non-destructive, must not harm system lines and parts, and must not absorb contaminants. Refrigerants must absorb and release large amounts of heat easily. Heat transfer is a major consideration in the efficiency of A/C systems. A refrigerant must be able to be easily controlled by pressure. A good temperature and pressure relationship is used in an A/C system for evaporation and condensation. -Types of Refrigerant – there are different types of refrigerants used in vehicles. Refrigerant R-134a has been used in automotive A/C systems since the mid-1990s. some vehicle makers are using R-1234yf refrigerant instead of R-134a in some models. Vehicles manufactured before 1994 contain R-12 refrigerant. It is important to use the correct service equipment for each refrigerant to recover and recharge the system -R-134a Refrigerant – properties of R-134a include: -It is a htdrofluorocarbon (HFC) -It is colorless. A leak cannot be detected through visual observation of a color change -It is odorless. A leak cannot be detected through an odor expelled from the system -Its state is easily controlled by pressure -Note: The type of refrigerant will be clearly labeled under the hood of the vehicle. Labels may be found on A/C system parts or on painted surfaces under the hood -R-1234yf Refrigerant – the development and use of R-1234yf refrigerant became necessary in order to comply with environmental impact standards. R-1234yf: -Requires specifically designed service equipment -Evaporator leak testing should be done when charging the system -Systems cannot be retrofitted from R-134a. the system must be installed by the vehicle maker when the vehicle is built -Is used in A/C systems similar in design to those using R-134a. it should not be used in R-134a systems, as these refrigerants are not compatible. -Note: Several vehicle makers are installing R-1234yf in certain vehicle models, but they may not be using it in all models, so it is important to verify the specific refrigerant type on each vehicle. R1234yf is flammable, however it has been determined to be safe for automotive use. -R-12 Refrigerant – R-12 refrigerant is not environmentally friendly and was phased out of use many years ago. If you are working on a classic vehicle with R-12, it may be difficult to source and the vehicle owner may want to consider having the system retrofitted to a different refrigerant. -R-134a Refrigerant Oil – polyalkylene glycol (PAG) is used in R-134a systems that do not have an electric compressor. The oil mixes with the refrigerant to lubricate the compressor. Because PAG oil absorbs moisture, an open system must be protected from the air to prevent corrosion and additional system problems. PAG oil capacities may be found: -Listed under the hood -In service manuals -On a list provided by the Mobile Air Conditioning Society -Note: As is the case with any type of A/C system, using the correct oil level is important. Overcharging a system with oil can reduce system efficiency, and the excess oil can cause accelerated compressor wear or failure. -Used PAG Oil – used refrigerant oil is considered a hazardous waste and should be handled accordingly. Do not mix refrigerant oils with motor oil waste. Adding refrigerant oil to engine waste oil may result in fines. -R-134a Lubricant Cautions – use caution when handling R-134a lubricant. R-134a lubricant can: -Damage vehicle finishes -Damage plastic parts -Damage engine drive belts and coolant hoses -Note: If a spill occurs, lush the area with water -Electric Compressor Oils – polyester (POE) oil is used in electric compressors. Vehicle makers may require a specific viscosity of oil be used that is compatible with the refrigerant and pump type. Introducing the wrong type of oil in an electric compressor system can cause a high-voltage system fault and may require replacement of all system parts. -R-1234yf Refrigerant Oil – the refrigerant oil and refrigerant travel through the system together and return to the compressor to lubricate it and prevent excessive friction and compressor failure. R-1234yf systems use the same PAG oil as R-134a systems. PAG oil absorbs moisture. This makes it important to prevent moisture from entering the system to prevent corrosion and additional system problems. As is true with all refrigerant types, adherence to R-1234yf system refrigerant oil capacities is important for proper system operation. Aluminum Panel Repair (1/2) Exterior Aluminum Panel Overview Aluminum Panel Characteristics -Aluminum use on a Vehicle – the use of aluminum in vehicle construction continues to increase with each model year. Some vehicles are constructed almost entirely out of aluminum, while others may only have certain parts and panels made of aluminum, such as the hood, fenders, doors, and trunk lid. Aluminum is also commonly used in mechanical parts. When aluminum is used for exterior panels, the benefit is less weight with strength similar to steel. Typically, aluminum panels will be thicker than a steel panel and still weigh less. Aluminum panels may be used in conjunction with aluminum, magnesium, steel, or composite materials -Alloying – alloying is the process of mixing two or more metallic elements with aluminum, such as magnesium, silicone, copper, tin, zinc, and manganese. Alloying is done to change the properties and strength of aluminum. There are two categories of aluminum alloys. One is heat-treatable. These alloys are heated in a controlled environment at some stage during part manufacture to strengthen the aluminum and create the temper, designated by the letter T, such as 6061-T0 (soft) and 6061-T6 (rigid). The softer heat-treatable alloys can be scratched more easily than the harder alloys. Some of the harder alloys may be comparable to steel in dent and scratch resistance. The other type of aluminum alloy is non-heat-treatable alloy, which are alloys that do not benefit from heating during manufacture and only gain strength through the stamping and forming process. These alloys are designated by the letter H, such as 5052-H0 (soft) and 5052-H32 (rigid). During repairs, heating can assist with repair efforts on both categories of aluminum, but should only be done following vehicle maker service specifications -Work Hardening Characteristics – work hardening of aluminum occurs during the forming process, collision damage, and straightening. Work hardening will cause an increase in strength at the location of bends and working of a panel. this can be beneficial to the design of a panel during manufacture, but may be detrimental to repairs due to the propensity of aluminum to crack if over work-hardened. Aluminum has less memory than steel, and if deformed, will want to stay in its new shape. Aluminum will resist efforts to return to its original shape. While aluminum repairs use many similar straightening techniques as steel, it is necessary to understand the differences in the application of these techniques and to use the correct tools specific to aluminum repair in order to be successful. Proper techniques and car must be taken in order to reduce the chance the part will crack Repair Considerations -Repair Considerations – considerations when analyzing damage include the: -Finish condition -Backside access -Damage in highly formed areas -Severity of damage -Note: The decision to repair versus replace a panel may be based on the vehicle maker’s recommendations. This information may be found in the body repair manual. -Finish – the condition of the vehicle finish will be one of the first considerations in determining the repair method. This includes the age, mil thickness, and damage. The film thickness is checked using a mil thickness gauge set for nonferrous. If the finish is cracked or broken, paintless dent repair (PDR) will not be an option -Backside Access – some dent removal options, when there is limited or no access to the back of the panel, may include using heat, glue-on pulling tabs, or dedicated aluminum weld-on dent removal equipment (weld-on studs). Use caution to avoid flammable materials behind the panel. when there is access to both sides, dent removal tools may include picks (PDR or traditional), hammer and dolly, spoons, slappers, and other metal working tools. Note: Always use caution when using heat or weld-on dent removal equipment on exterior panels. There may be flammable materials behind some panels. -Damage in Highly Formed Areas – damage to panel edges, body features, and contour lines should be considered when making repair or replace decisions. These areas are typically repaired first. Also consider the surrounding damage using the rule, last in, first out. There are some exceptions to this rule such as the edges of the panels and body feature lines. Damage in highly formed areas is prone to cracking during repairs -Damage Analysis for Cracks – damaged and repaired areas should be inspected for cracks. A visual inspection may or may not reveal a crack in the panel; therefore, a dye penetrant kit can be used. The kit consists of cleaner, dye, and developer. The cleaner prepares the surface for the dye penetrant. The dye is designed to penetrate and then stay in the damaged are after it is wiped off. The dye must be removed before any welding operations because the dye will contaminate the welding area. To remove dye penetrant and developer, a solvent, such as the cleaner or a wax and grease remover, may be used. The developer makes the defects visible. Aluminum Panel Repair (2/2) Exterior Aluminum Panel Repair Galvanic Corrosion Protection -Tools and Abrasives – corrosion results when different metals contact each other in the presence of oxygen and an electrolyte. An example of an electrolyte is water that is not pure. Galvanic corrosion can happen when aluminum and steel contact each other. During the repair process, you should make every effort to avoid cross-contamination so there are no future galvanic corrosion issues due to collision damage or the repair process. Cross-contamination can be prevented by having tools and abrasives that are dedicated for use on steel and tools and abrasives that are dedicated for use on aluminum -Hand Tool Considerations – hammers or dollies used for repairing aluminum should not have nicks or gouges. Aluminum is softer than steel and may be damaged by the sharp edges of the tool. Some options for tools used on aluminum include: -Polished, steel-faced, with edges rounded off -Aluminum-faced -Plastic-faced/rubber -Wood with leather face -Pouches of lead shot -Picks -Note: Picks can be used to lift low areas when there is limited access to the panel backside. Picks should have polished, rounded tips so that they do not damage the panel. a plastic cover may also be placed over the tip to prevent scratches and damage to the inner panel. shrinking or serrated-faced hammers and dollies should not be used because they may damage the aluminum -Power Tool Considerations – as a best practice, power tools should be dedicated for steel or aluminum. If it is necessary to use the same power tool for steel and aluminum, you should: -Clean the housing with an appropriate cleaner and a clean cloth -Separate the blades, bits, or abrasives used on aluminum from steel accessories -Aluminum and Steel Applications – there are numerous applications where steel and aluminum are intersecting, connecting, or touching in some ways. Protecting parts is critical to keeping galvanic corrosion from forming. Some galvanic corrosion prevention methods include: -Sealing the area to keep out any electrolytes, such as water or moisture -Using coated fasteners -Separating the two metals with a non-conductive insulator, such as adhesive or non-conductive spacers -Aluminum Part Assembles – some vehicles have vehicle maker-installed threaded inserts, or if aluminum threads are damaged, a replacement stainless steel thread may be available. A magnet may be used to identify aluminum versus steel parts. Service information is also a good resource. Some vehicles use both steel and aluminum parts to make an assembly. When dissimilar types of materials are joined together, proper coating and insulation (with paint or adhesives) must be considered. -Vehicle Maker Recommendations – vehicle makes may have specific recommendations to help prevent galvanic corrosion. For example, non-conductive urethane may be recommended by the vehicle maker for bonding stationary glass to an aluminum pinch weld. Damage resulting from corrosion due to the use of improper fasteners, rubber or plastic parts, or adhesives may not be covered under the warranty. -Aluminum Dust Particles and Cautions- grind or sand at slow speeds using light pressure to avoid damage or thinning the part. Doing this will help to reduce he chance of: -overheating the aluminum -Embedding contaminants in the aluminum, which could lead to corrosion -Clogging the abrasive with aluminum. Some sanding and grinding discs are designed to be used only on aluminum. These types of discs are typically identified by the letters “ALU” on the label or the backside of the disc. -Aluminum dust particles are nontoxic, but they are lightweight and float in the air, and are lung and eye irritants. The dust particles are collected using a dust extraction system and a sparkless vacuum. Dedicated aluminum work areas and curtain walls can help reduce cross-contaminant issues. Do not blow the dust using compressed air, as doing this will spread the aluminum dust around the work facility and cause contamination issues where it lands. -Note: high concentrations of fine aluminum dust can present a fire and explosion hazard Aluminum Panel Straightening -Paintless Dent Repair (PDC) Glue-On Pull Tabs – when choosing repair methods, it is recommended to use the least invasive method necessary to remove the damage. Consider using glue-on pull tbs if the finish is in good condition. Glue-on pull tabs are commonly used when there is no access to the panel backside, but can be used even if there is backside access. When removing damage, it is common to combine different techniques depending on access. Glue-on pull tabs require the panel surface to be cleaned. Special hot-melt glue is used to adhere pulling attachments to the panel. a hand-pulling tool, pulling bridge, or slide hammer is used to pull on the attachment. Stress-relieving is done around the area. A cleaner is used to remove adhesive residue -Removing Dents with Heat- heat can be effective to remove dents. Always refer to the vehicle maker’s recommendations when working with heat. Heating in a circular motion around the dent and slowly moving the heat source toward the center of the dent can remove or greatly reduce the size of the dent. Thermal expansion will cause the metal to expand and relieve internal stresses, this causes the metal to rise and push toward the center. As the aluminum cools, it contracts, causing the metal to return closer to its original shape. Heat must be monitored to avoid reaching an annealing temperature. Once annealed, the aluminum is permanently softened. Corrosion protection is a consideration in affected areas -Heat for Repairs- when repairing aluminum, heat will help soften the metal slightly to aid in straightening efforts and reduce the chance the panel will crack. When heating aluminum, consider the following points: aluminum does not change color when heated to its melting point. The approximate melting point of aluminum is 1200 degrees Fahrenheit (649 degrees Celsius). An aluminum part can be melted easily with some heat sources, such as an induction heater and open flame sources. Aluminum naturally forms an oxide coating when exposed to air; this oxide melts at about 3,700 degrees Fahrenheit (2,038 degrees Celsius). Heat spreads faster in aluminum than steel. Temperature is more critical than time. If the repair heating temperature is exceeded, the panel may become permanently softened, also referred to as annealing. 425 degrees Fahrenheit (218 degrees Celsius) is a typical repair heat recommendation. Heat as low as 250 degrees Fahrenheit (121 degrees Celsius) will damage some adhesive and require removal of the affected panels. Avoid heating joints that will remain in service. When heating aluminum, always follow the vehicle maker heating recommendations Degree chart -3,500 degrees Fahrenheit (1,927 degrees Celsius) – Melting point of Aluminum Oxide -2,700 degrees Fahrenheit (1,482 degrees Celsius) – Melting point of Steel -1,200 degrees Fahrenheit (649 degrees Celsius) – Aluminum melts -755 degrees Fahrenheit (402 degrees Celsius) – Annealing – heat-Treatable Alloys -650 degrees Fahrenheit (343 degrees Celsius) – Annealing – Nonheat-Treatable Alloys -400 to 570 degrees Fahrenheit (204 to 299 degrees Celsius) – Repair Window according to the Aluminum Association -350 degrees Fahrenheit (177 degrees Celsius) – Paint Bake Temperature -68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) – Room Temperature -Hammer and Dolly Techniques – when repairing aluminum, every effort should be made to avoid overworking the metal to minimize additional work hardening, and reduce the chance the panel will crack -Hammer and Dolly – when using a hammer and dolly, the hammer-off-dolly technique is the preferred method of repairing damage to aluminum. The dolly is positioned to raise low areas on the backside of the panel, while the hammer or slapper is used on the front to tap down high areas. The hammer strikes the panel slightly to one side of where the dolly is help. The positioning of the dolly in relation to the hammer makes this effective because the high areas are being lowered and the low areas are being raised at the same time. The hammer-on-dolly technique should not be the primary technique for aluminum. This technique can be used to remove pick marks and small high spots, and to reshape localized damage, but is not the preferred method on aluminum because it can be easily thin and stretch the panel -Spoon/Slapper – when removing damage with a hammer and dolly, a spoon/slapper may also be used. A spoon generally has a larger striking surface than a hammer, and may be used to work larger damage or high crown lines around dents -Pry Picks- pry picks may be used in conjunction with a hammer and dolly to methodically remove the damage. Picks should have rounded ends to minimize panel damage. If using pry picks, gently work the panel and avoid raising high points in the panel. the use of a metal file in conjunction with a pick and hammy/dolly should be done cautiously to avoid thinning the panel -Weld-On Dent Removal- there are weld-on dent removal tools designed specifically for the removal of dents in aluminum panels. This equipment welds a stud onto the panel that can be used to pull damage out of the panel. -Weld-On Dent Removal Tools- before using this equipment on a vehicle, the battery should be disconnected and the cables isolated to protect the electronic systems on the vehicle. Before attaching a weld-on stud, make sure there is no chance of fire from foam or other material on or touching the backside of the panel. once the stud is welded on, a pulling attachment is then installed on the stud. The attachment is used for pulling out the low areas. A variety of pulling devices are available including hand pulling tools, slide hammers, and bridge/gantry devices to pull on multiple studs at the same time. Weld-on dent removal tools can be used when there is limited access to the backside of a panel. aluminum weld-on dent equipment operates on very short, high voltage spikes to weld the studs, so the burning of backside coatings is usually minimal. After repairs are complete, corrosion protection on the panel backside should be addressed. -Removal Sequence – before working on a damage part, test the equipment on a similar aluminum sheet to determine the power settings. This will reduce the chance of burning through the panel. it will also ensure that there is enough heat to attach the pulling stud to the panel. if too much power is used, a hole may burn into the panel, requiring part replacement. The sequence for removing a dent is: -1. Identify the area of the dent -2. Remove the finish using P80 grit or finer sandpaper -3. Attach the ground clamp(s) -4. Install the weld-on stud -5. Start on the area with the least amount of damage, and work to the center of damage, while using caution not to over-pull the damage, creating a stretched condition. -When identifying a dent, sanding block, file, or DA with guide coat may be used. Once the high or low spots are identified, the repair plan can be revised and the damage removed. Not all damage is the same. Analyze the damage and determine the appropriate repair plan Making a Hem Flange -Working with Hem Flanges on Aluminum Panels – hem flanges on aluminum exterior panels may include: -hoods -Rear closure panels -Door skins -The quarter panel wheelhouse flange -Removal – when removing a panel that was bonded using adhesive along a hem flange area, grind the outer edge of the panel with P50 grit. Separate the panels by applying heat to soften the adhesive. A panel separation tool may be inserted along the ground edge to separate the panels. When separating panels, use care to not damage the mating flanges. Special tool bits for an air hammer are available to open the hem flange for panel removal. In some situations, there may be rivets or other attachments that require removal -Preparation – straighten and prepare the flange on the inner panel to ensure the new panel fits properly and a uniform bond line of adhesive is applied. Steps may include: -Removing the remaining adhesive and other coatings -Cleaning the bonding area -Applying primers if required by the vehicle or adhesive maker -Note: the replacement panel may require removing E-coat in the areas adhesive will be applied, or the E-coat may only require cleaning and/or scuffing. Keep in mind some panel installations may be to a different type of metal, so precautions should be followed to avoid cross-contamination and possible galvanic corrosion issues -Panel installation – when installing an aluminum panel with a hem flange: -Apply adhesive to the panel where the hem flange will be made. Adhesives should be applied to both sides of the flange to seal out moisture and contaminants -Ensure all bare metal areas are coated -Set the panel in place and slide to adjust the position, do not lift -Form a rope hem flange around the panel perimeter. Use care not to flatten the flange, as this may cause the panel edge to crack -Remove excessive adhesive from the panel while it is wet -Rope Hem Flange and Forming Process – a rope hem flange is a special type of hem used on aluminum panels. A rope hem flange has a larger radius than a standard hem flange and is used on aluminum panels. Heat-treated aluminum does not form easily, so a gradual radius keeps the hemmed edge from cracking while being formed. Some replacement parts will require a hem. Parts such as door panels and quarter panels will have their flanges pre-bent to 90 degrees. After the panel has been properly fit-up pliers, hammer and dolly, or a special hem flange forming tool may be used to begin bending the flange, creating a larger radius. A hammer and dolly are typically used to complete the rope hem flange. The dolly is placed on the edge and face of the replacement panel while the flange is being hammered down. Work the hem flange in increments, do not attempt to completely hem all at once. Hammering is kept away from the bend area to avoid flattening it. Working too close to the bend area may cause the aluminum to crack Welding and Surface Prep -Welding a Tear – if a panel has a tear or crack from collision damage or due to repairs, welding may be an option. Considerations for welding a crack or tear include vehicle maker recommendations. Check the vehicle maker’s service information to identify if panel replacement is required in the event of a crack or tear. The location of the damage may preclude welding due to adhesives or lack of backside access to properly clean the panel. the extent of the damage is a factor. Welding a crack or tear is similar to welding an open butt joint and requires a high degree of skill to complete successfully on an aluminum panel. welding is typically done using a GMA welder with pulse and synergic capabilities. Tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding may be an option, but part removal from the vehicle is required to protect the vehicles electronic systems from damage -Welding Aluminum – when welding aluminum, it is recommended to use a machine that operates on 208-230 volt power (or higher) and is either single-or three-phase. Pulse spray-arc transfer with synergic controls is also recommended. The most common shielding gas is 100 percent argon. Use the plush technique when welding aluminum. Aluminum welds are easily contaminated, so it is important that both sides of the panel are completely clean down to the bare metal surrounding the weld area. Welding cracks or tears across panel edges may not be possible due to the lack of access to clean the backside and the possible use of adhesive by the vehicle maker -Electrode Wire Considerations – to ensure a durable repair, it is important to select the correct electrode wire. Most vehicle makers will specify the electrode wire alloy and diameter that should be used on a particular application. ER5356, ER5554, ER4047, and ER4043 electrode wires are commonly used -Surface Preparation – after straightening work and welding, the panel should be finished and prepared for paint. prepare the surface by: -1. Sanding the surface to the recommended grit that is identified by the vehicle or product makers, as they may have specific grit requirements for body filler or refinishing -2. Remove dust using an explosion-proof (sparkless) vacuum. A shop vacuum is not an explosion-proof vacuum. Do not use compressed air for removing dust from aluminum panels. -Note: Body filler should be applied as soon as possible after sanding to limit oxidation. Before applying the body filler, determine if the vehicle or product maker requires an epoxy primer between the bare metal and the body filler. -Body filler – when selecting a body filler, verify that it is designed for application to an aluminum panel. the vehicle may specify a particular product to use. Polyester body fillers typically consist of polyester resin, talc, and a catalyst. Talc can absorber moisture, which may reach the panel it is applied to. Some body fillers are made with aluminum powder. The panel should be sanded with P80 grit in preparation for body filler application. Ensure all oxide has been removed and apply body filler immediately. When cured, sand to shape, finishing in P180 grit or finer as required by your paint maker. If bare metal is exposed during the sanding process, a direct-to-metal primer will be required before applying any additional body filler. When working on aluminum panels, P80 grit or finer should be used to reduce thinning of the panel. an exception may be where specific weld dressing or hem flange removal requires a coarser grit. Note: Some vehicle makers require the use of an aluminum-based body filler for use on their aluminum vehicles -Primer – when applying primer, prepare the surface by: -1. Cleaning and preparing according to the product maker’s recommendations -2. Sanding with the recommended grit sandpaper and featheredging the repair area -3. Masking the vehicle to prevent overspray -4. Applying primer following the product maker’s recommendations. -5. Sanding the cured primer following the product marker’s recommendations -Note: after the primer has been applied, the refinishing process is similar to refinishing steel parts Aluminum Vehicle Overview (1/3) Module 1 – Aluminum Overview -Overview – modern vehicles are built to meet certain fuel economy requirements, emission regulations, and safety standards, while providing the performance, comfort, and features consumers want. To meet this, many vehicle makers use aluminum in the outer body panels and structure. Repairing damaged aluminum requires an understanding of: -Various forms -Attachment methods -Limits of repairability -Work characteristics -Other considerations -Three Manufacturing Methods- there are three manufacturing methods commonly used in vehicle body construction. Depending on vehicle maker requirements, aluminum parts may be made from: -Extrusions – these parts are generally used as structural parts -Castings – these parts are almost always used as attachment points for structural parts -Stampings – these parts may be structural or cosmetic -Note: forging is another method used to make parts, but this is less commonly used on body part construction -Developing a Repair Plan – when developing a repair plan, reference the vehicle maker service information to determine if the vehicle parts and structure can be straightened, or if replacement is the only option. Additionally, it is important to identify the required repair attachment method, which may differ from the original factory method. Sectioning may be allowed on some parts, while others require replacement at factory seams. Additional actions to take when developing a repair plan include: -Verifying parts and fasteners are correct -Identifying any special tools required -Checking heating recommendations for removing bonded parts and straightening aluminum parts -Note: A vehicle maker may specify a certain adhesive, body filler, and primer to be used on their aluminum vehicles and have specific refinish requirements -Aluminum Stampings and Locations – -A stamping is created from a rolled sheet of aluminum that passes through a die. Stamped parts will generally be identified by: -Relatively uniform thickness -Flanges for attachment -Stretch marks -Areas that seem to have gathered from the forming process -An aluminum stamping may be used for exterior panels and other body parts such as: -Fenders -Hoods -Deck lids -Outer body side panels -Rails -Pillars -Stamping Repair Considerations – cold straightening is the process of straightening bent metal without using heat; for example, removing damage from a panel with a hammer and dolly or pulling a bent rail. Generally, very minor damage can be repaired without heat depending on the thickness of the part and the extent of the damage. Straightening a thick part without heat will often cause the part to crack. Heat may be applied to assist moving the molecules to help reduce the chance the part will crack. Follow vehicle maker temperature recommendations -Extrusions – extrusions are made by pressing heated, solid aluminum billets through heated dies. Sometimes, if the part must be straight, an extrusion is pulled as it exits the die. A simply example of extruding is pushing adhesive out of a tube or cartridge. The adhesive tip serves as the die. Unique characteristics of extruded parts include no pinch weld flange. However, there may be an attachment flange on the part. This looks like a pinch weld and is designed to have parts riveted or welded to it -Extrusion Identification – extrusions can be complex designs and shapes with seams that are not visible and may have a variable thickness cross section. Extrusions are made from a continuous form and can be either straight or curved. A rocker panel reinforcement is an example of a straight extrusion. If an extrusion is curved, this is typically done by hydroforming the extrusion. Extrusion can be either single-cell or multi-cell. A single-cell extrusion could be a piece of tubing. A multi-cell extrusion will have webbing inside the main extrusion, and the internal webbing design may be a variety of different shapes -Extruded Structural Applications – extruded parts work well for structural applications, and some vehicles are built primarily from extrusions. Examples of extruded structural parts may include: -Rocker panels -Roof rails -Pillars -Frame rails -Tie bars -Extrusion Repair Considerations – when considering what repairs may be possible for an extrusion, keep in mind extrusions may crack when damaged or during the repair process. This occurs because of the work hardening of the aluminum. Many extrusions have internal webbing that strengthens the part. When straightening is attempted, the extra support from the webbing may cause the part to crack -Limited Repair – repair options may be limited due to the design of an extrusion. Some vehicle makers may not allow any straightening to their aluminum structures. If straightening is allowed, cold straightening may cause the part to crack. Heat should only be used if allowed by the vehicle maker. Do not exceed the vehicle maker’s heating recommendations. As a general rule, temperatures should not exceed 450 degrees Fahrenheit (230 degrees Celsius). Keep in mind that heat spreads quickly in aluminum and can cause adhesives in nearby joints to fail -Sectioning or Partial Replacement – damaged extrusions may require replacement at factory seams. There may be procedures for sectioning, partial replacement t factory seams, or replacement of only the damaged cell. Procedures may use welded joints, bonded joints, or rivet-bonded joints -Aluminum Castings – aluminum castings are created by pouring or injecting molten aluminum into a mold. The aluminum is allowed to cool and harden, and then the cast part is removed from the mold. Castings can be made into nearly any shape or thickness, with variations in cross section and wall thickness. Castings are typically machined to a smooth surface at the attachment areas. Parts are generally attached to other parts with gas metal arc (GMA) fillet welds, bolts, rivet bonding, or a combination of methods. -Use of Castings – -Due to their light weight and strength, aluminum castings are used on some vehicles for: -Wheels -Rear-end housings -Transmission cases -Engine blocks -Steering and suspension parts -They may also be used in door frames and for inner structures. Cast aluminum parts may be used for joints where multiple parts come together, as well as: -Rail sections -Strut towers -Pillars -Suspension mounting locations -Casting Identification – one identifying characteristic of an aluminum casting is a rough, textured surface. Sine addition indicators include parts being solid, irregularly shaped, and a machined surface with tapped holes -Casting Repair Considerations – castings are usually replaced if damaged. When replacing a casting, it may be reattached using adhesive, bolts, or rivets. GMA welds, or a combination of these. If threads in a casting are damaged, the vehicle maker may specify to re-tap, or use a thread repair insert. When installing a thread repair insert, it is required to use a stainless steel insert. If a carbon steel insert is installed, corrosion may occur -Vehicle Design – aluminum-intensive vehicles may use a space frame or unibody design. They may also have a hybrid structure that combines steel and aluminum -Galvanic Corrosion – galvanic corrosion occurs when dissimilar metals come in contact with each other in the presence of an electrolyte. Some ways to avoid galvanic corrosion include applying coatings to dissimilar materials that contact each other or using coated fasteners. Corrosion can come from using conductive materials like plastic or rubber plugs, hoses, and body grommets that contain carbon. Carbon is an electrically conductive material. It becomes electrically active with aluminum and causes corrosion between the aluminum and the part containing carbon. When installing stationary glass, a non-conductive urethane adhesive may be recommended since it does not contain carbon Aluminum Vehicle Overview (2/3) Module 2 – Aluminum Repair Considerations -Working Safely with Aluminum – aluminum dust is explosive in the correct concentration and can be more volatile if mixed with iron particles and other substances. Aluminum dust is a non-hazardous irritant to the eyes, nose, throat, and lungs. Personal protective equipment should be used. It is important to have adequate ventilation to remove the aluminum particles from the air in the work area. A dedicated vacuum may be used to collect aluminum dust. It must be an explosion-proof and sparkless motor design. Using a regular shop vacuum may present an explosion risk -Separate Work Area – vehicle makers typically require aluminum repair work to be done in a designed aluminum repair area. They may require their vehicles be repaired in an area that is clean and isolated from steel parts and vehicles. This reduces cross-contamination and the possibility of galvanic corrosion -Dedicated Tools – it is recommended to use separate tools when working on aluminum. This reduces the chances of contaminating the aluminum with steel particles. If dedicated tools are not used, extra care must be taken to thoroughly clean tools to remove and aluminum or steel debris -Compressed Air – do not use compressed air to remove or move dust that may contain aluminum particles. Aluminum dust remains suspended in the air longer than steel and will settle throughout the repair facility -Cutting Tools and Abrasives – dedicated cutting tools and abrasives for aluminum must also be used. Using the same saw blade for steel and aluminum parts is a near certain method of cross-contamination. Some abrasive materials, like cutting and grinding discs, are designed for aluminum only. The grinding discs designated for aluminum, usually marked ALU, do not clog like grinding discs that are made for steel -Workability of Aluminum – working with aluminum is different from working with mild steel. For instance, aluminum has less memory than a mild steel part. Once deformed, aluminum cannot be easily returned to its previous shape. Keep in mind thicker material is more susceptible to cracking when straightening. Heat may be an option for straightening aluminum as long as the parts are not heated above 450 degrees Fahrenheit (230 degrees Celsius) or vehicle maker limits. It is also important to know the workability of aluminum varies with alloys. Some alloys are easier to repair than others -Methods of Applying Heat – when applying heat to aluminum, there are multiple methods that can be used. One method is using a propane, map gas, or oxyacetylene torch. Exercise caution when using an open flame to avoid excess heat input. An induction heater may be used, but heating times will typically be longer compared to steel because aluminum dissipates heat much quicker than steel. Additionally the nonferrous properties of aluminum may reduce the effectiveness of some induction heaters. Another method is using a heat gun. A heat gun may be a better tool for applying heat to aluminum because of the lower heat output and better control. Note: Temperature-controlled heat guns can help manage heat applications better -Heating Considerations – when heating aluminum, it does not change color before reaching its melting point. Aluminum has a melting point of approximately 1,220 degrees Fahrenheit (660 degrees Celsius) and a very high rate of heat transfer. Compared to steel, aluminum will transfer. Compared to steel, aluminum will transfer heat across the panel about three times faster. Aluminum also has a much greater rate of thermal expansion compared to steel. Bare aluminum forms an oxide layer when exposed to air. The oxide layer melts at a much higher temperature than the aluminum. Heat should only be used if allowed by the vehicle maker -Temperature Limits – when considering the use of heat, verify vehicle maker temperature limits. Heat indicators such as crayons, paint, noncontact thermometers, and adhesive thermometers can be used to ensure the heating window is not exceeded. Compared to steel, aluminum does not have cumulative heating times that need to be monitored. The spread of heat may compromise the adhesives in nearby joints and areas. This requires the removal of affected parts and new adhesive applied. This may also require some parts replacement -Annealing – if aluminum is heated above a certain temperature, the area being heated will become annealed. When a part becomes annealed, it is permanently softened and cannot be returned to its original hardness. The specific annealing temperature varies by aluminum alloy and may be as low as 650 degrees Fahrenheit (343 degrees Celsius). This is why the repair temperature window is typically limited to 450 degrees Fahrenheit (232 degrees Celsius). Vehicle makers may have different limits. -Emissivity – if a noncontact thermometer is being used, it may not provide accurate temperature readings. This is because of the reflectiveness of bare aluminum. The emissivity, which is the temperature radiated from the reflective surface, causes an inaccurate temperature reading. When a noncontact thermometer is used to measure temperature, reflective parts cause the sensor to read inaccurately. To compensate for this, measure the temperature in a nearby painted area. A dull, high-temperature paint can also be applied to the part so the measured temperature is more accurate -Anchoring an Aluminum Vehicle – when conducting structural repairs, the vehicle requires measuring and anchoring. Structural straightening and stress relieving should only be done if allowed by the vehicle maker. During anchoring, the vehicle maker may specify universal fixture or dedicated fixture or may allow bench-style frame machines with specialized adapters and additional anchoring equipment -Straightening Considerations – there are considerations that must be made when straightening a vehicle part. For instance, when straightening aluminum, it is common practice to pull on parts that are non-repairable and going to be replaced. Using undamaged parts for pulling will likely cause additional damage -What May Be Repairable – when aluminum is bent or kinked, returning it to its undamaged position is not easily done, and the part may crack or tear. Kink versus bend does not apply with aluminum like it does with steels. Straightening aluminum that is kinked or that has sharp bends may crack when straightened -Dye Penetrant – after straightening, dye penetrant should be used to inspect for cracks in the part. Weld beads can also be checked for defects. Dye penetrant can be a valuable tool for locating damage that may not be visible otherwise -Crack Repair – check the vehicle maker service information or position statement before repairing a cracked part. Vehicle makers typically do not allow repairs of cracked structural parts. This requires partial, if allowed, or full part replacement. Cast parts that are cracked should be replaced. Some vehicle makers allow cracked welds to be ground out and re-welded, but there may be length limits -Straightening Aluminum – aluminum does not easily return to its original shape. Due to spring-back, a part may need to be overpulled slightly and stress-relieved to realign the structure. This can be done with a hammer and wooden blocks or wooden slappers. Heating during this process reduces the chances of cracking. Monitor for progress and damage at the location of the pull and other areas on the vehicle where damage could occur from pulling forces. Monitor anchor locations to ensure no damage is incurred. Additional anchoring may be required depending on how the structure is responding. Collision damage and repair operations may compromise rivet-bonded joints -Adhesive Bond Removal – when removing aluminum parts, adhesive may have to be removed. Adhesives can be softened using heat. This can be done using a heat gun or an infrared lamp. Adhesive begins to break down at about 400 degrees Fahrenheit (205 degrees Celsius), some at lower temperatures. Note: Using sharp tools will help reduce heat and clogging of the cutting teeth -Cutting, Drilling, and Grinding – there are some general best practices that can be applied when working with aluminum. When drilling or cutting, lubricant helps prolong the life and minimize clogging of the cutting tool. Lubricants could be a solid bar or a liquid. Solid lubricant is rubbed across the cutting surface. Grind or sand with reduced speed and light pressure. Tools operated at too high of a speed and with too much pressure creates heat and can cause the aluminum to smear. Work with properly maintained tools and cutters that are sharp. Sharp cutting tools reduce heat in the part and fatigue of the operator. Note: Rotary carbide burrs made for steel will clog quickly. Use burrs designed for aluminum to avoid this. Aluminum Vehicle Overview (1/3) Aluminum Overview Aluminum Fabrications -Overview – modern vehicles are built to meet certain fuel economy requirements, emission regulations, and safety standards, while providing the performance, comfort, and features consumers want. To mee this, many vehicle makers use aluminum in the outer body panels and structure. Repairing damaged aluminum requires an understanding of various forms, attachment methods, limits of repairability, work characteristics, as well as other considerations. There are three manufacturing methods commonly used in vehicle body construction. Depending on vehicle maker requirements, aluminum parts may be made from: -Extrusion – these parts are generally used as structural parts -Castings – these parts are almost always used as attachment points for structural parts -Stampings – these parts may be structural or cosmetic -Note: Forging is another method used to make parts, but this is not typically used on body part construction -Developing a Repair Plan – when developing a repair plan, reference the vehicle maker service information to determine if the vehicle parts and structure can be straightened, or if replacement is the only option. Additionally, it is important to identify the required repair attachment method, which may differ from the original factory method. Sectioning may be allowed on some parts, while others require replacement at factory seams. Additional actions to take when developing a repair plan include: -Verifying that the parts and fasteners are correct -Identifying any special tools required – examples include structural repair equipment, riveting tools, and welders -Checking heating recommendations for removing bonded parts and straightening aluminum parts -Note: A vehicle maker may specify certain adhesives, body filler, and primers to be used on their aluminum vehicles and have specific refinish requirements -Aluminum Stampings and Locations – a stamping is created from a rolled sheet of aluminum that passes through a die. Stamped parts will generally be identified by relatively uniform thickness, flanges for attachment, stretch marks, and/or areas that seem to have gathered from the forming process. An aluminum stamping may be used for exterior panels and other body parts including, but not limited to: fenders, hoods, deck lids, outer body side panels, as well as rails, pillars, reinforcements, crossmembers, floors, and other parts of the vehicle body or frame. -Stamping Repair Considerations – cold straightening is the process of straightening bent metal without using heat; for example, removing damage from a panel with a hammer and dolly or pulling a bent rail without heat. Generally, minor damage can be repaired without heat, depending on the thickness of the part and the extent of the damage. Straightening a thick part without heat will often cause the part to crack. Sometimes when cold straightening has been done as much as possible, limited heat may be applied to assist moving the molecules to help reduce the chance the part will crack -Extrusions – extrusions are made by pressing heat, solid aluminum billets through heated dies. Sometimes, if the part must be straight, an extrusion is pulled as it exits the die. A simple example of extruding is pushing adhesive out of a tube or cartridge. The adhesive tip serves as the die. Unique characteristics of extruded parts include no pinch weld flange. However, there may be an attachment flange on the part which looks like a pinch weld designed to have parts riveted or welded to it -Extrusion Identification – extrusions can be complex designs and shapes with seams that are not visible and may have a variable thickness cross section. Extrusions are made from a continuous form and can be either straight or curved. A rocker panel is an example of a straight extrusion. If an extrusion is curved, this is typically done by hydro forming the extrusion. Extrusions can be either single-cell or multi-cell. A single-cell extrusion could be a piece of tubing. A multi-cell extrusion will have webbing inside the main extrusion, and the internal webbing design may be a variety of different shapes -Extruded Structural Applications – extruded parts work well for structural applications, and some vehicles are built primarily from extrusions. Examples of extruded structural parts may include: -Rocker panels -Roof rails -Pillars -Frame rails -Tie bars -Extrusion Repair Considerations – there are a number of things to consider when repairing an extruded part -May Crack When Damaged – when considering what repairs may be possible for an extrusion, keep in mind extrusions may crack when damaged. This occurs because many extrusions have internal webbing that strengthens the part. When straightening is attempted, the extra support from the webbing may cause the part to crack -Limited Repair – because of the design of an extrusion, repair options may be limited. Some vehicle makers may not allow any straightening to their aluminum structures. If straightening is allowed, cold straightening may cause the part to crack. Heat should only be used if allowed by the vehicle maker, do not exceed the vehicle makers heating recommendations. As a general rule, temperatures should not exceed 450 degrees Fahrenheit. Keep in mind that heat spreads quickly in aluminum and can cause adhesives in nearby joints to fail -Sectioning or Partial Replacement – damaged extrusions may require replacement at factory seams. There may be recommendations for sectioning, partial replacement at factory seams, or replacement of only the damaged cell. Procedures may use welded joints or bonded joints, usually with rivets in the joint area -Aluminum Castings – aluminum castings are created by pouring or injecting molten aluminum into a mold, usually made of sand or metal, under pressure. The aluminum is allowed to cool and harden, and then the cast part is removed from the mold. Castings can be made into nearly any shape or thickness variations in cross section and length and are generally machined to a smooth surface or attachment. Additionally, aluminum castings are often made with variable wall thicknesses throughout the part and are generally attached to other parts with gas metal arc or GMA (MIG) fillet welds. They can also be attached to other parts using bolts or rivet bonding -Use of Castings – due to their light weight and strength, aluminum castings are used on some vehicles for wheels, rear-end housings, transmission cases, engine blocks, and steering suspension parts. They may also be used in door frames and for inner structures. Cast aluminum parts may be used for joints where multiple parts come together, as well as rail sections, strut towers, pillars, and suspension mounting locations -Casting Identification – one identifying characteristic of an aluminum casting is a rough, textured surface that is the result of molten metal contacting the mold surface during the casting process. Some additional indicators include parts being sold, parts that have irregular shapes, and machined surfaces on parts that may have tapped holes -Casting Repair Considerations – castings are replaced if damaged. When replacing a casting, it may be reattached using adhesives, bolts, or rivets, or GMA (MIG) welding. If threads in a casting are damaged, the vehicle maker may specify to re-tap, or use a thread repair insert. When installing a thread repair insert, it is required to use a stainless steel insert. If a carbon steel insert is installed, corrosion may occur -Vehicle Design – aluminum-intensive vehicles may use a space frame or unibody design. They may have a hybrid structure, where steel and aluminum are used together to create the vehicle body -Galvanic Corrosion – galvanic corrosion can occur from different sources. Some of these include dissimilar metals coming in contact with each other in the presence of an electrolyte and using conductive materials. Some ways to avoid galvanic corrosion include applying coatings to dissimilar materials that contact each other or using coated fasteners. Another source of corrosion can come from using plastic or rubber plugs, hoses, and body grommets that contain carbon. Carbon is an electrically conductive material that can become electrically active with aluminum and cause corrosion between the aluminum and the part containing carbon. When installing stationary glass, a non-conductive urethane adhesive is recommended since it does not contain carbon Aluminum Vehicle Overview (2/3) Aluminum Repair Considerations Working with Aluminum -Working Safely with Aluminum – when working on or around aluminum vehicles, some special safety considerations should be observed -Dust Ventilation – aluminum dust is explosive in the correct concentration. Aluminum dust is a non-hazardous irritant to the eyes, nose, throat, and lungs. Personal protective equipment should be utilized. It is important to have adequate ventilation to remove the aluminum particles from the air in the work area. If a vacuum is used to clean up aluminum dust, it must be an explosion proof/sparkless motor. Using a general vacuum can cause an explosion risk -Separate Work Area – vehicle makers may require aluminum repair work to be done in a designated repair area or they may require that their vehicles be repaired in an area that is clean and isolated from steel vehicles -Dedicated Tools – some vehicle makers require separate tools for working on aluminum. This is to reduce the chance of contaminating the aluminum with steel particles. If dedicated tools are not being used, extra care must be taken to thoroughly clean tools to remove any aluminum or steel debris, ensuring no contamination will occur -Compressed Air – do not use compressed air to remove or move dust that may contain aluminum particles. Aluminum dust will remain suspended in the air longer than steel and will settle throughout the repair facility -Cutting Tools and Abrasives – dedicated cutting tools and abrasives for aluminum must also be used. Using a saw blade interchangeably between a steel and aluminum part is a near certain method of cross contamination. When cutting aluminum, there are lubricants that can be used to reduce heat in the area being cut, and also increase cutting efficiency. Some abrasive materials, like cutting and grinding discs, are marked for aluminum only. The grinding discs that are designed for aluminum do not clog for grinding discs that are made for steel and used on aluminum. -Work Hardening – work hardening occurs when a metal part is formed or bent. Sheet aluminum is work hardened when it is stamped into a specific shape, causing the molecules in the metal to be strained. Work hardening can happen multiple times to a part: first when the part is made, second during a collision, and third during the repair of the damaged part. A part may crack or tear due to damage or may occur during the straightening process. Parts that crack typically require replacement. Check the vehicle maker service information or position statements before repairing a cracked part -Workability of Aluminum -working with aluminum is different from working with mild steel. For instance, aluminum has less memory than a mild steel part. Once moved, aluminum cannot be easily moved back to its previous shape. Keep in mind that thicker material is more susceptible to crack when straightened. Heat may be an option for straightening aluminum as long as the parts are not heated above 450 degrees Fahrenheit. It is also important to know that the workability of aluminum varies with alloys. Some alloys are easier to repair than others. Heating and Straightening Considerations -Methods of Applying Heat – when applying heat to aluminum, there are multiple methods that can be used. One method is using a propane, map gas, or oxyacetylene torch. An induction heater may be used, but heating times will be longer compared to steel because aluminum dissipates heat much quicker than steel. Another method is using a heat gun. A heat gun may be a better tool to use for applying heat to aluminum because of the lower heat output and better control. Note: Temperature controlled heat guns can help manage heat application better -Heating Considerations – there are a number of things to consider when heating an aluminum part. When heating aluminum, note that it does not change color before reaching its melting point. Aluminum has a melting point of approximately 1,220 degrees Fahrenheit and a very high rate of heat transfer. Compared to steel, aluminum will transfer heat across the panel about three times faster. Bare aluminum forms an oxide layer when exposed to air. The oxide later melts at a much higher temperature than the aluminum. Heat should only be used if allowed by the vehicle maker. -Temperature Window – Heat Indicators – Cumulative Times – when considering the use of heat, verify vehicle maker temperature limits. Heat indicators such as crayons, paint, noncontact, thermometer, and adhesive thermometers can be used to ensure the heating window is not exceeded. Compared to steel, aluminum does not have a cumulative heating times that need to be monitored. The spread of heat may compromise adhesives in nearby joints and areas requiring the removal of affected parts -Annealing – if aluminum is heated above a certain temperature, the area being heated will become annealed. When a part becomes annealed, it is permanently softened and cannot be returned to its original hardness. The specific annealing temperature varies by aluminum alloy and may be as low as 650 degrees Fahrenheit. This is why the repair temperature window is typically limited to 450 degrees Fahrenheit. Vehicle makers may have different temperature limits -Emissivity – if a noncontact thermometer is being used, it may not provide accurate temperature readings. This is because of the reflectiveness of bare aluminum. The emissivity, which is the temperature radiated from the reflective surface, will cause an inaccurate temperature reading. When a noncontact thermometer is used to measure temperature, reflective parts will cause the sensor to read inaccurately. To compensate for this, measure the temperature in a nearby painted area of dull paint can be applied to the part so the measured temperature is more accurate -Anchoring an Aluminum Vehicle – when conducting structural repairs, the vehicle will require measuring and anchoring. Structural straightening/pulling and stress relieving should only be done if allowed by the vehicle maker. During anchoring, the vehicle maker may specify universal fixture or dedicated fixture or may allow bench style frame machines with specialized adapters and additional anchoring apparatus. -Straightening Considerations – there are considerations that must be made when straightening a vehicle part. For instance, when straightening aluminum, it is a common practice to pull on parts that are non-repairable and going to be replaced. Using undamaged parts for pulling can create additional damage -What May Be Repairable – when evaluating what may or may not be repairable, questions need to be asked: does the vehicle maker allow repair of the part(s)? is the part a stamping, casting, or extrusion? Depending on the answer to that question, part thickness needs to be considered. The thicker the part, the harder it is to straighten. Location of damage may also affect accessibility to repair damage -Kink vs Bend, Dye Penetrant – when aluminum is bent or kicked, returning to its undamaged position is not easily done without some cracking occurring. Kink versus bend does not apply with aluminum like it does with steels. Straightening aluminum that is kinked or that has sharp bends tend to crack when straightened. After straightening has been done, dye penetrant should be used to inspect for cracks in the panels or the weld beads. Dye penetrant can be a valuable tool for locating damage -Crack damage – cast parts that are cracked should be replaced. Crack repair on other types of parts is dependent on the vehicle maker and may be permitted. Some vehicle makers allow cracked welds to be ground out and re-weld -Straightening Aluminum – aluminum does not easily return to its original shape. Due to spring-back, a part may need to be over-pulled slightly and stress relieved to realign the structure. This can be done with a hammer and wooden blocks, or wooden slappers. Heating during this process will reduce the chance parts will crack. Monitor for progress and damage at the location of the pull and other areas on the vehicle where indirect damage could occur from straightening. Monitor anchor locations to ensure no damage is incurred. Additional anchoring may be required depending on how the structure is responding -Part Removal and Preparation – when removing aluminum parts, rivets, welds, or other fasteners will require removal as well, and adhesive can be softened using heat. This can be done using a heat gun or an infrared lamp. Adhesive begins to break down at about 400 degrees Fahrenheit, some at lower temperatures. Keep in mind, heat can damage adhesive in adjacent and underlying flanges as well, which may require additional part removal. When separating the panels, use a thin separating tool, as using large chisels and pry bars can cause the flanges to stretch and become damaged. Note: Using sharp tools will help reduce heat and clogging of the cutting teeth -Cutting, Drilling, and Grinding – when cutting, drilling, or grinding on aluminum, there are some general best practices that can be applied to make the process easier. Using lubricant helps the drilling or cutting processes and prolongs the life of the cutting tools. These lubricants could be bar or solid lubricants or a cutting oil. When sanding, grinding, cutting, or drilling, a solid lubricant block is rubbed across the cutting surface. Grind or sand with light pressure and reduced tool speeds. Tools operated at too high of an RPM and with too much pressure create heat, clogs, abrasion, and smears in the aluminum. Work with tools that are in good condition and cutters that are sharp. Sharp cutting tools reduce heat in the part and fatigue of the operator. Note: Rotary carbide burrs made for steel will clog quickly, use burrs designed for aluminum to avoid this Aluminum Vehicle Overview (3/3) Module 3 – Attachment Methods and Processes -Mechanical Fastening – vehicle makers use many different methods for attaching parts to the vehicle. There are a variety of mechanical fasteners that may be used to attach parts. These fasteners include bolts, flow drill screws, rivets, clinches, and hemming of panels. Adhesives are commonly used with mechanical fasteners -Adhesives – adhesives are commonly used on aluminum-intensive vehicles for joining both structural and cosmetic parts. Adhesive locations usually have mechanical fasteners, such as rivets. The color of adhesive used by the vehicle maker is generally not available for aftermarket repair. Regardless of what color adhesive the vehicle maker uses during vehicle assembly, always use the specified repair adhesive. Vehicle makers may have unique flange preparation and treatment steps identified in their service information -Welding – GMA welding, laser welding, and resistance spot welding may be used in aluminum vehicle construction -Working with Clinches – clinches are another method vehicle makers use where panels are pressed together to make their own fastening systems. A die is used to imprint onto a panel, and no hole is made. Clinches are not used in structural applications. Inspection of a clinch is fairly simple. Either it is loose or it is not. If a clinch comes loose, a hole is typically drilled through the clinch, then adhesives and a rivet are installed to secure the panels. Vehicle makers may specify GMA plug welds to reattach a panel at some clinch locations -Repair Fastener Methods – during repairs, refer to the OEM service information to determine the repair attachment method. Note that the vehicle maker may identify more than one method that can be used in a particular location and that more than one method may be required on the same panel at different locations -Mechanical Fastening – -Many of the fasteners used for collision repair are similar to what is used by the vehicle maker. These may include: -Bolts -Flow drill screws -Rivets -Hems -Some factory panel attachment methods cannot be duplicated during collision repairs. These include clinches and the installation of flow drill screws into panels without an existing hole. When parts are joined by a hem, such as a door skin, some vehicle makers may only service those parts as assemblies or require a special type of hem flange -Adhesives and Rivet Bonding – adhesives are commonly used on aluminum-intensive vehicles during repairs, usually with other attachment processes, such as rivets or a hemmed flange. Adhesives and primers should not be used where the vehicle maker does not require them. Therefore, specific preparation guidelines should be referred to when rivet bonding flange preparation is done to an area that will receive adhesives. Vehicle makers may recommend applying adhesive to bare aluminum only or lightly scuffing the E-coat of a new part before applying adhesive. Some additional actions when rivet bonding include: -Applying adhesive to cover all bare metal surfaces -Clamping the panels together and installing the rivets -Working within rated times of the adhesive -Allowing for a full cure of the adhesive -Welding- when welding, pulsed-spray-arc-capable equipment is required. The vehicle maker may specify a particular welder with programmed settings. Argon shielding gas is usually specified along with a specific electrode wire alloy and diameter. Welding aluminum can be challenging as it is not as forgiving as steel. Extensive practice may be required to master aluminum welding, particularly when welding overhead and in tight contours like a rocker panel. test welds should be performed on similar materials and position before welding on the vehicle. Aluminum must be very clean before welding with all oxide and other coatings removed from all joint surfaces. Do not use weld-through primer. Note: Resistance spot welding is not commonly done during repairs due to the high current requirements -Aluminum Frames – vehicles with aluminum construction may require rivet bonding or welding when sectioning or replacing structural parts at factory seams. Vehicle makers may have special expanding bonded inserts for some sectioning joints -Aluminum Frame Sectioning – sectioning of frame rails and other structural parts may be permitted by some vehicle makers. For example, the 6 th generation Corvette ZR1 frames are made of aluminum and have one piece hydroformed side rails that run the length of the vehicle. There are a number of sectioning procedures for the aluminum frame rails that use a butt joint with backing -Replacement at Factory Seams – some parts may only be replaced at the factory joining locations. For example, replacement frame parts for the C7 and C8 Corvette are installed at the factory seams. Sectioning or partial replacement is not supported by the vehicle maker unless specifically documented in a service bulletin or repair procedure -Hemmed Flanges – aluminum hem flanges are made at the vehicle maker before the 6000-series aluminum is bake-hardened. By doing this, the aluminum is formed while it is softer. A rope hem flange is used for installing replacement parts that are already heat-treated. A rope hem flange allows for a larger radius to be made as the replacement panel is installed on the part. This reduces the chance the radius edge will crack -Bolts – steel bolts used for attaching aluminum panels should have a special anti-corrosion coating some of these coatings may have a light green or dull grey color. This type of bolt coating cannot be applied by the repair technician. Depending on the recommendations by the vehicle maker, these fasteners may be one-time use. This is because after the fastener is installed, the coatings may be become damaged. Some vehicle makers may allow coated bolts to be reused following proper inspection. If there is any corrosion on the fastener or if the coating is damaged, it should be replaced -Bolt-On Aluminum Parts – when replacing bolt-on parts, inspect the condition of the attachment points. Ensure any required materials or coatings are in place and torque fasteners to specification. If bolts are one-time use and the part being installed requires adjustment where the bolts may be loosened and retightened, it may be suggested to test fit the part using the old bolts -Flow Drill Screws – -Flow drill screws are: -Used to attach cosmetic and structural parts -Made of steel -Installed by the vehicle maker -Typically available as a service part -May require replacement with rivets during repair -A flow drill screw is not a self-tapping screw, but rather a screw that is spun at a fast speed and pressed against the aluminum. When the aluminum gets hot and soft, the flow drill screw is pushed through the aluminum. A flow drill screw may have a Torx-head or a special socket-head design. When joining dissimilar metals, such as steel and aluminum, vehicle makers may use these. Whenever dissimilar metals are attached to each other, adhesives may be recommended to help insulate against galvanic corrosion -Video: Installation of a Flow Drill Screw – EJOTs, otherwise known as flow drill screws, are installed at the factory in panels where there is a hole in the upper panel and none in the bottom panel. to install a flow drill screw, the fastener is spun very fast. The flow drill screw is pressed against the lower panel to create friction and heat in the lower panel. as the lower aluminum panel gets warm and soft, the flow drill screw is pushed into the panel. when the screw passes all the way through the panel, it stops spinning and the aluminum cools and threads form around the screw. If repairs are necessary in parts that use flow drill screws, they can be removed and reinstalled, as long as the threads in the lower panels are not damaged. Some vehicle makers requirement replacement, either with a new flow drill screw or with a different type of fastener such as a bolt or blind rivet -Working with Rivets- -Aluminum-intensive vehicles generally use rivets for both new vehicle assembly and during repairs. Rivets are used for both structural and cosmetic parts. The types of rivets used may include: -Solid -Blind -Self-piercing rivet (SPR) -Flow form -Solid punch, these are only installed by the vehicle maker -Rivets are one-time use fasteners. When ordering rivets, make sure to use what is recommended by the vehicle maker. Keep rivets organized by type in separate packaging or divided storage container until needed to reduce contamination issues and mixing of sizes. Note: Special tools may also be required to install some rivets. Although some of the tools can be bought from different suppliers, some of them are only available from the vehicle manufacturer -Solid Rivet Installation Scenarios - vehicle makers may identify aluminum or steel solid rivets for some locations during repairs. When installing solid rivets, adhesives must be used. Protruding-head rivets are used in some applications. Flush-mount rivets may be identified for some cosmetic and structural part attachment on some vehicles -Working with Blind Rivets – blind rivets require holes through all panels being joined and may be used in new vehicle construction and during vehicle repairs. Types of blind rivets used in repair part installation may include hemlock or monobolt rivets. These types of rivets may be universal (protruding-head) or flush-mount. Blind rivets may require a pneumatic or hydraulic rivet gun and a special nose piece to install. Hemlock and monobolt rivets should not be interchanged unless the vehicle maker permits this -Service Part Attachment Scenarios – the chart on this page shows some of the different combinations of attachment methods vehicle makers may specify. Part joining methods are subject to change; therefore, it is always recommended to access the most up-to-date service information. When selecting rivets, be sure to use the rivet size and part number specified by the vehicle maker. Fasteners, including rivets sourced outside the vehicle maker supply chain, may not meet required specifications. -OEM Attachment-Repair Attachment -Weld-&gt; weld, blind rivet, SPR -Clinch-&gt; blind rivet, SPR -Blind rivet-&gt; Blind rivet, weld -SPR-. SPR, blind rivet, solid rivet, weld -Working with SPRs – SPRs are made of high-strength, coated steel. SPRs are installed by the vehicle maker and may be specified during repairs to duplicate the original attachment process. SPRs can be installed with special electric – or pneumatic-hydraulic pressing tools. SPRs can be removed by pressing out with special dies, grinding the backside, or drilling, which can be difficult Analyzing Damage from Natural Causes (1/2) Hail Damage Dent Removal -Temporary Repairs – in some cases, especially where there was a large hailstorm that damaged many vehicles, repair time may be at a premium, requiring the customer to wait several weeks before their vehicle can be repaired. In these cases, temporary repairs may be a good option to make the vehicle drivable while waiting for scheduled repairs. Types of repairs may include replacing damaged headlamps or tail lamps for drivability. In some cases, the windshield or back glass maybe replaced to protect the interior from further water damage -Conventional Dent Removal – hail dents can be removed through conventional dent removal techniques using: -A hammer and dolly -Heat shrinking, which requires heating the panel and quick cooling to contract the metal and reduce the size of the dent -Stud welding, which requires welding small pins, or studs, to the panel and gently pulling on the pins systematically to remove the dent -Body filler following initial straightening -Panel Finish Considerations – pre-existing panel condition should be taken into consideration when determining PDR options. For example, PDR is typically not an advantage when the finish is scratched, chalked, or dull. However, it may be useful with finishes that are difficult to color match. If there is body filler beneath the finish, the part cannot be repaired using PDR. Body filler will crack from the PDR process. If the vehicle was restored and older materials were used, it is possible the finish will crack during the dent removal process. Note: Check the film thickness to identify previous repairs or additional paint coatings. Custom finishes should also be taken into consideration, as these coatings may be more brittle and crack from the PDR process -Additional Estimate Items for PDR – most vehicle makers allow PDR, but do not have a formulalized position statement. You may need to add these items to the PDR estimate: -Parts that must be removed to access the backside of the dents -Airbags located along the roof rail, may limit access to the roof panel or roof rail and may need to be deactivated -Sheet metal designs make access to the backside of hail dents difficult and increase the required repair time -Corrosion protection for the panel backside -Damage that exceeds a half-dollar size -Roof repairs for certain vehicles, such as minivans, SUVs, and extended cab pickup trucks -Common PDR Access Points – to access the backside of panels, there are a number of holes in the vehicle structure that can be used. Some of these include the headlamp mounting area and leading edge of the front door. Both of these are used to access the backside of the fender. The tail lamp mounting area may be used to access the backside of the quarter panel. Also, any factory plug holes can be used to access the panel backside. You can also access the under hood area, but this requires you to remove the insulation. Accessing the backside of the door skin may require you to remove interior trim and window regulators. Because there are airbag sensors contained in some doors, restraint system deactivation may be required before performing PDR work. -Roof Panel PDR Access Points – the roof panel may require adjacent parts to be removed to access the panel backside. This may include removal of the hatch, luggage rack, sunroof, and headliner. If doing PDR on a roof rail, note that some vehicle designs have side curtain airbags in this area. Some vehicle makers may require disabling the restraint system before removing the headliner assembly -PDR Limitations – when performing PDR repairs, technicians should not drill access holes. If holes must be cut to access the panel backside, PDR is not an acceptable option. Adding holes to a structural part can alter the structural integrity of the vehicle, creating collapse zones where none were intended. Foam should not be removed when performing PDR. It would be difficult to reinstall foams in many situations. PDR should not damage other parts during the dent removal process. An example of this may include elongating an access hole by placing pressure on it during the dent removal process. Be aware that the finish may be damaged during dent removal -PDR on Aluminum Panels – the PDR process is slightly different for aluminum panels compared to steel. Dents in aluminum are shallower than steel dents, as aluminum resists impacts better than steel. So it is possible that on the same vehicle, an aluminum hood will have less damage compared to the steel roof. Also, aluminum has less metal memory than steel. In some cases, when working with aluminum panels, heat may be used to make the metal more malleable. If heating, consider what is behind the panel to avoid damaging adhesives or foam and to avoid overheating the panel, as this may result in damage to the paint, eliminating the benefit of PDR. Be aware that more time may be required to perform PDR on aluminum if the spot becomes work-hardened. Note: It is important to remember that aluminum work hardens quicker than steel. The more the dent has to be worked with the PDR tools, the less likely the dent will be completely removed. -Post PDR Inspection – during the PDR process, it is possible that the corrosion protection materials on the backside of the panel may be removed from the repeated scratching of the dent tool tips, even if the tips may be protected with plastic. Therefore, corrosion protection must be restored to ensure the durability of the repair. Because it is difficult to see if the corrosion protection was removed, it is safest to assume that the finish has been scratched and apply anti-corrosion compound to the backside of the panel. Following PDR repairs, check for microcracking. Any damage to the coating will require the area to be refinished -Combination Repair – some types of damage may allow a combination repair, which is where PDR is used along with conventional repair methods. For example, on one panel the bigger dents may be repaired conventionally and the smaller dents may be repaired with PDR. This type of repair may allow blending to stay within a panel, depending on the blend location Hail Damage -Weather-Related Damage – types of weather-related vehicle damage include hail, wind, and lightning. Floods are also a very common type of weather-related damage. However, flood damage is covered in separate I-CAR course -Hail Damage Identification – hail damage looks similar to door dings, but is generally found above the crown of the panel, unless there are high winds driving hail into all areas of a panel. Damage is generally only on one side of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is being driven during the storm. Hail generally does not chip paint. It will create a smooth dent with no breaks in the finish. If the hail halls on the panel edges, such as the front of the roof that meets the windshield, the paint film may crack. Depending on the thickness, refinishing panels may not handle the hail as well as the original finish. A high film thickness may result in possible chipping of the paint in a hail storm. Note: When analyzing hail damage, note that panels may delay the appearance of hail damage until they are heated by the sun. as the metal expands, hail damage may become more pronounced. -Repair/Replace Hail-Damaged Panel – when making the decision to repair or replace panels, consider the amount of damage to the panel, the cost to repair vs replace, availability of parts, repairability, and the ease of replacement -Percent of Damage – consider the percentage of damage to the panel. If a panel has hundreds of hail dents, panel repair may simply not be feasible, as the damage is too extensive. There may also be concern about the durability of the repair. -Cost – consider the cost of repair versus replacing the panel. Depending on the vehicle make and model, even a panel with considerable damage may be more cost effective to repair rather than replace -Parts – take the ease of obtaining the part into consideration. If a panel is back-ordered or rare, repair may be the better option. Since parts are ordered following the estimate, this may not be immediately evident, requiring a change to be made to the estimate -Repairability – consider the repairability of the part. Some parts, such as trim pieces, are difficult to repair, or to repair cost effectively -Ease of Replacement – consider the ease of panel replacement. For example, replacing a hood or deck lid, which are bolt-on parts, is much easier than replacing a welded or bonded roof panel. Replacing a roof generally requires removing and installing the windshield and back glass. Depending on the flange configuration, it may also require drilling out the top portion of the B-pillar or sail panel. It is recommended to be as least invasive as possible during the repair process -Half Damage Inspection Tips – there are several techniques that will make evaluating hail damage easier -Systematic Approach – follow a systematic order to ensure all panels are inspected and an accurate dent count has been made. Use water-soluble markers to highlight hail dents on the vehicle. Do not use grease pencils, as they may not be washed off adequately. It is also possible that grease pencils may bake into the finish, damaging the clearcoat -Multiple Angles – it is helpful to view each panel from multiple directions. Different viewing angles provide different lighting that may better identify hail damage. Reflection is key, especially for taking digital images. Using a striped or checked board can help highlight depressions in the panel surface. This only works on a gloss finish -PDR Matrix – several paintless dent repair (PDR) professionals and insurance companies have created charts to help assist in determining the cost. The PDR matrix is broken into seven different categories that range from “very light” to the “limit” which is the maximum number of dents to be addressed. The matrix assists in determining the cost of PDR relative to damage location, quantity, and size -Reference Tool – a reference tool may be used that is specially designed to determine hail dent size for damage analysis purposes. This tool includes various sizes of discs used to determine dent size when compared to a specific reference chart or cost matrix. These discs are commonly the size of a U.S. dime, nickel, quarter, and half dollar. While not used every time to estimate damage, these discs may be used when starting out to identify damage size. Note: PDR damage estimates are typically based on the size and quantity of hail dents in conjunction with a hail damage PDR matrix -Inspecting Hail Damage – factors to consider when inspecting hail damage include lighting, cleanliness, colors, and water. Lighting angles can cast shadows into panel depressions. Indoor inspections typically provide better light for identifying dents. Direct sunlight can often hide smaller dents, so shade is necessary to get an accurate dent count. A clean vehicle is helpful when inspecting hail damage. Even a light layer of dust can hide smaller dents, causing an inaccurate count. Dark colors show dents better than light colors. You can use a squeegee over a wetted panel to help identify depressions in the panel, as they will remain filled with water. Note: Look for the smallest dents first. Do not let obvious size dents direct your perception. This may lead to missing a large percentage of damage -Glass Damage from Hail – when analyzing glass damage, keep in mind that hail size is directly related to damage. Hail storm damage, unless severe, generally does not damage laminated glass. Large hail typically results in a smash-type damage that is not repairable. Hail does not create repairable damage, such as a bullseye, starbreak, or crack. Pit marks are often caused by everyday driving, not hail -Convertible Top – convertible tops are also susceptible to hail damage. Depending on the size of the hail stones, damage may include rips, tears, and punctures. Possible convertible top repair options include: -Sewing seams -Replacing fabric -Repairing or replacing the frame -Replacing the back window -Note: The older the top, the more damage that may occur. This is due to degradation of the fabric that can occur over time from weather and UV exposure Hail Damage Fraud Indicators -Hail Damage Fraud Indicators – when inspecting hail damage claims, some common fraud indicators may include: -Rounder dents, common with a golf ball or ball peen hammer. Hail dents are typically steeper, with no creases and do not have any paint transfer or scratches -Damage on all sides of the vehicle. Often, hail damage is directional, meaning it is on the upper panels and one side of the vehicle, unless the vehicle was being driven during the hail storm -Even dent pattern. Hail falls on random points of the vehicle with no specific pattern -Dents on panels, but no damage on metal trim such as roof and belt moldings. Fraudulent hail damage claims can be detected by inspecting the shape, location, and pattern of damage -Insurance Service Office (ISO) – Fraud may be difficult to prove, even when suspected. One tool used to help determine if there have been previous claims on a vehicle includes checking Insurance Service Office (ISO) reports. Prior damage is not covered under new polices. The ISO is a data collector that specifically services the insurance industry and has a portion of the business devoted to auto claims information. The ISO will need information about the claim and the zip code and/or vehicle identification number (VIN) to retrieve the required data in order to find the size, cause, and amount of a previous loss Analyzing Damage from Natural Causes (2/2) Wind, Lightning, and Infestations Wind Damage -Causes of Wind-Related Damage – high winds can cause vehicle damage. While the wind does not cause the damage itself, it commonly occurs when falling objects, such as: -Tree limbs -Home roofing materials -Miscellaneous flying debris, essentially anything that can fall or become a projectile from high winds -Note: Wind damage is often directional, similar to hail damage -Wind and Sand – another type of damage that is more common in the desert regions is wind-blown sand. Blowing sand can create a sandblasted-type of damage on a vehicle that can affect the: -Trim -Chrome -Headlamps -Wheels -Finish. Sand can etch or scratch the clearcoat, if not deeper -Note: Some storms have been known to damage the windshield. Sand storm damage can cause sand to blow through the crankcase breather tube into the oil crankcase. Generally, damage cannot simply be repaired by applying clearcoat. Most times, the finish must be sanded and reapplied -Wind Damage Repairs – common methods of repair from wind-related damage include: -Refinishing -PDR or conventional dent removal techniques for dents and dings in the panels -Suspension repair due to damage that may occur from heavy objects falling on a vehicle -Structural repairs, depending on the extent of damage. For example, a tree falling on a vehicle can damage the exterior panels, structure, and/or suspension Lightning Damage -Lightning Strikes – lightning is essentially a large spark of electricity that can reach over five miles (eight kilometers) in length, raise the temperature of the air by as much as 50,000 degrees Fahrenheit and contains 100 million electrical volts. These strikes, many of which go cloud to ground, occur about 22 million times per year in the United States. The odds of a lightning bolt striking a vehicle or striking near a vehicle are good, but a rarity to witness -Lightning Damage – lightning causes damage in one of two methods, including a direct strike or electromagnetic induction -Direct Damage – a direct lightning strike to a vehicle is difficult to determine. Generally, there are no large areas of damage that occur to the vehicle structure. Often the damage shows up as a small puncture in the metal. For direct strikes to the vehicle, note that lightning: -Strikes the highest points on a vehicle. This is generally the roof or antenna -May cause the antenna to burn, melt, and/or bend -May cause the antenna mounting location to show signs of burning or melting -Electromagnetic Induction – a lightning strike near a vehicle may cause damage in the form of electromagnetic induction. Electromagnetic induction can travel hundreds of feet. In these cases, there is no apparent physical damage to the vehicle, but the vehicle electronics may show damage. Low voltage systems are most prone to damage from electromagnetic induction -Lightning Damage Analysis – when analyzing lightning damage to the vehicle: -Verify a thunderstorm occurred by checking recent local weather reports -Verify damage to electrical or mechanical parts by turning the vehicle ON and checking for malfunction indicator lamps. In some cases, the vehicle may not run due to extensive damage to the electronic systems -Check for evidence of burning, or charring on circuit boards, wire connectors, or the fuse box -Inspect fuses to determine if several fuses have been damaged at once -Lightning strikes tend to affect more than one vehicle. Check with the insurance companies to determine if multiple claims were made for vehicles parked nearby -Note: It can be difficult to determine the full extent of the damage through visual inspection alone. It may be impossible to know the full extent of damage until the diagnostic process is complete -Lightning Damage Repair – technicians may start with testing main system modules, such as powertrain control module (PCM) or engine control module (ECM), just to get the vehicle running, then work down to smaller sub-systems. They may also need to talk to a vehicle maker representative to determine what should be repaired first after a lightning strike. It is also important to note that just because a vehicle has been repaired and operates properly does not ensure a long-lasting repair. Parts can be partially damaged from a lightning strike, and fail at a later time, even after repairs have been made and the vehicle delivered to the customer Infestation Damage -Types of Infestations – infestation can cause serious damage to a vehicle. Common intruders include mice, squirrels, and rabbits. Common infestation problems include electrical issues with various systems, commonly caused by chewing through wiring harness insulation, and nesting in fuse boxes and the engine compartment. Nesting in heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) ducts can block ducts, leading to heating and cooling problems. Infestation is more common in vehicles that have not been used for a period of time. Common types include RVs or collector vehicles that have been in storage. It is also more common in rural areas compared to more urban areas -Infestation Inspection – when inspecting a vehicle for infestation, all accessible cavities should be checked, including the engine compartment, hoses, wiring, insulation, interior, and trunk. Rodents will look to gain entry at any access point, including areas filled with rubber grommets and seals. If necessary, a borescope may be used to see inside panels or inside HVAC ducts without disassembly. If nests or remnants are found, the parts can be disassembled for proper cleaning -Infestation Cleanup – cleaning up infestation debris can be as simple as removing a nest from an engine compartment or as involved as calling in a specialist who deals specifically with cleaning biohazardous materials. Determine when specialists are required. Often, if the infestation includes the interior or ductwork of the vehicle, professional cleaners are recommended. With mice, one of the larger risks includes exposure to the hantavirus. While not common, consider this health risk when treating infestation. Common removal techniques include removing the nest and vacuuming up the residue. Do not blow the material out of the affected area. Use a recommended cleaning solution to wipe down the area. It is important to wear an air-purifying respirator, safety goggles, and gloves to protect against contact with potential infectious waste Analyzing Fire Damage (1/2) Fire Damage Identification The Cause of Fire -Vehicle Fire Statistics – some reports say U.S. fire departments respond to approximately 152,300 automobile fires per year. According to this report, common causes of vehicle fires include: -Mechanical failures (49%) -Electrical failure (23%) -Arson (8%) -Exposure to other sources of fire (5%) -Collisions and rollovers (3%) -Note: 64% of mechanical fires began in the engine compartment, running gear, or wheel area, while only 2% of the vehicle fires originated in the fuel line or fuel tank area -Determining the Cause of Fire - -Vehicle fires are commonly started: -By accident -Intentionally (arson) -By mechanical or electrical failure due to poor maintenance, a design flaw, etc -Before beginning the estimate, one of the primary items to look for is cause. Auto physical damage appraisers and estimators need to ask themselves the following questions: -What started the fire? -Where did it start? -Was the fire initiated in the vehicle, or was it caused by an external source, such as a nearby house fire or garage fire -Note: Determine if the fire burned from the engine compartment into the passenger compartment, or burned from the passenger compartment into the engine compartment, or started from an outside -Determination Aids – when determining cause, check the vehicle maker or national database, such as the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), for potential recalls. The NHTSA website, www.nhtsa.gov , provides a searchable database of all recalled vehicles. Also, look for vehicle modifications that may have caused shorting or overheating -Common Modifications – common modifications that can lead to fires: -High performance stereo equipment -Aftermarket electronics, such as GPS, alarms, phone charges, and video systems, that have been hard-wired into an existing vehicle circuit -Note: These types of fires generally have an electrical ignition point. Many events are not obvious. In these instances, some insurers may choose to use professional fire inspectors to determine the cause and origin of a fire. These individuals are trained to determine where the fire started in the vehicle, and the source of the fire -Vehicle Owner – when determining the cause of the fire, asking the customer the right questions can be almost as valuable as examining the fire damage itself. Some questions that can provide clues about how the vehicle started include: -Was the vehicle running smoothly? -Were there any prior problems? -Was the vehicle running when the fire started? If so, how long was it running? If not, how long was it since the vehicle was turned off? -Was there any recent repair work performed? -What color was the smoke? Different materials create different colors of smoke -How was the vehicle being used at the time of the fire? Was it normal operation? -Was any aftermarket equipment installed? -What did the vehicle owner see at the time, or just before the fire began? -Note: For example, understanding what the conditions were at the time of the fire can help pinpoint the system that malfunctioned -Fraud – an intentional vehicle fire is either an act of vandalism (joy rides or for use in thefts) or a cause of fraud, where the vehicle owners are looking to collect compensation for the damage. -Potential Indicators – potential indicators of fraud include: -Keys left in the ignition. If the vehicle was stolen, the ignition system should have an indication that it was defeated -All windows were rolled down. This is done to ensure there is adequate ventilation to fuel the fire. -Fires starting in the back seat, front seat, or floor of the vehicle -Remnants of the accelerant -Varying accounts between the adjuster interview of the customer and police report -Note: If the vehicle burned completely, the odds are considerably less likely that this material can be found -Oil Sample – another potential fraud indicator can be found in an oil sample. Having the oil tested for contaminants can provide a motive behind arson. For example, if an oil test reveals that the oil contains high amounts of metals such as tin, lead, iron, or aluminum, it is a good indication that the engine has broken down. The presence of metals such as those in the oil is not caused by fire and would lead an investigator to examine the service history of the vehicle -Suspicion – if there is a suspicion of fraud, it is important that estimators and auto physical damage appraisers not disturb any evidence. Fire investigators need to examine the vehicle to pinpoint the exact cause. Timeliness is key to fire investigation. If it will be some time before an investigator can inspect the vehicle, it will be helpful to take pictures Point of Origin -Determining Point of Origin – determining cause and origin is important to: -Help identify trends in potential electrical/mechanical fires -Determine if fraud (arson) is a possibility -Note: When determining the point of origin, burn patterns are examined. Some may think the first thing you look for is the hottest point of the fire. However, often times the hottest spot of a vehicle fire is not the point of origin. For example, a wiring harness that starts a fire will not burn as hot as power steering fluid -Fire Burn Pattern – vehicles often have a burn pattern that gives the fire inspector an idea of the general location of where the fire started. Two common locations where fires start are the instrument panel and the engine compartment -Instrument Panel – if the fire starts beneath the instrument panel, it will consume the flammable materials and work its way up to the headliner. The heat from the fire can potentially break the tempered door glass, allowing in more oxygen and intensifying the fire. The heat of the fire rises, so the floor will be the last to burn. The fire will move forward to the engine compartment and rearward to the trunk, burning in a V-shaped pattern, eventually consuming the entire vehicle -Engine Compartment – for fires that start in the engine compartment, it is important to note that how engines burn faster than cold engines. As the fire burns, the fluids in the area start to feed the fire. Eventually, the fire burns through the cowl at the point of the heater fan or A/C inlet, as these areas are generally made of plastic. Once the fire enters beneath the instrument panel, a similar burn will occur as described for the instrument panel -Mechanical Fire – mechanical fires can start through a variety of methods, including: -Fluids beneath the hood spraying onto a hot source, such as gasoline, transmission fluid, motor oil, power steering fluid, brake fluid, and coolant -Tires, from being overheated -Brakes not releasing properly, resulting in a brake drag situation that overheats the brakes -A heat shield being removed or falling off the vehicle, resulting in the floor getting hot enough to start the interior carpeting on fire -Power steering fluid and brake fluid rarely start fires, but once heated to a very hot temperature in a fire, they will burn very hot -Coolants that contain ethylene glycol. These has a flash point of around 230 degrees Fahrenheit and an auto ignition temperature around 770 degrees Fahrenheit. If there is a leak that causes the coolant to fall on a hot surface, the water can boil away, leaving just the ethylene glycol, which could ignite. -Note: Each of these fluids, if not the actual ignition point of the fire, will certainly fuel the fire and help it spread throughout the vehicle -Accidental Fire – the majority of accidental fires start in the engine compartment. It helps fire inspectors if they have a general knowledge of how parts under the hood are positioned and their proximity to each other. This in turn helps the inspector understand how the fire spread. It is also important to remember that due to the extensive heat, most engine fires are not repairable unless they are extinguished quickly -Electrical Fire – it has been mentioned that approximately 23% of all vehicle fires are started by a faulty electrical system. Electrical fires can occur from -Shorts -Faulty switches -Faulty motors -A wire that is too small for a power requirement that is too large -Note: When a smaller wire shorts, the melting will only go back to the larger wire. With a large wiring harness, a fire can be much larger. The burning wire harness now acts like a fuse as it burns toward more combustible material, such as plastics or vehicle fluids. It is helpful to know where electrical items are routed when tracing the potential source of a fire. Items to look for when suspecting an electrical fire include blown fuss, which may help identify which systems they protect, and unusual wiring attachments -Evidence Locker – vehicle fires are not normal, for this reason insurance companies and repair facilities are interested in identifying the cause of the fire to determine if it was due to poor design, worn parts, or was intentionally set. Knowing this will help to determine liability and how potential evidence is handled -Liability and Faulty Parts – no repairs should be made until the source and cause of the fire is identified. This is a liability issue for the technician and repair facility. By restoring a vehicle exactly as it was before the fire, the technician may inadvertently set up a situation where another fire will take place. For example, if the cause is a bad circuit design by the vehicle maker, and the vehicle is repaired using replacement parts of the same design, the technician has essentially ‘lit the fuse’ for another potential fire. If the cause is determined and a faulty part is identified, the faulty part that caused the fire should be saved by the collision repair facility. This part can then be viewed by any party who has an interest in the cause and origin of the vehicle fire, and may be used as evidence in any subsequent legal proceedings. Additionally, any evidence, whether it is part of the original vehicle design, aftermarket, or related to possible arson, should not be altered, destroyed, or lost. This is known as ‘spoilation of evidence’ and should be avoided to prevent possible litigation problems -Chain of Custody – additionally, photos may be required of the suspected damaged part. Maintaining and documenting this evidence and nothing who has had access to it, in legal terms, is known as ‘chain of custody’. Chain of custody is the movement and location of physical evidence from the time it is obtained until the time it is presented in court. An example of when chain of custody would be applied is if the gas tank straps were breaking on one vehicle, causing the tank to fail. In situations like this, the collision repair facility should store, record, track, and protect the faulty part from being tampered with, in the event the part needs to be inspected during a subsequent investigation. If there are any indications of potential product liability, perhaps the repair should not be completed quickly, as there may be pending investigations Determine Temperatures -Determining Temperatures – different materials burn at different degrees, and different degrees of heat have varying effects on steel -Determining Temperature – fire investigators are able to determine specific temperatures by examining oxidation of metals, such as steel and copper. Thus, if an investigation is going to be performed on a vehicle, it is recommended to keep the vehicle covered. Exposure to the elements, such as rain and sun, can expedite the corrosion process, making it more difficult to pinpoint the ignition point. Additionally, if the vehicle can be repaired, proper covering prevents damage to the interior if windows are open or broken. Investigators also check the melting of plastics, taking into consideration that some plastics melt at higher temperatures. Note: A bumper cover will melt and burn at a much lower temperature than a plastic intake manifold -Solids – this chart identifies the ignition temperatures and melting points of various materials. Knowing these temperatures helps identify the temperature of a fire. For example, acrylic fibers have an ignition temperature of 1040 degrees Fahrenheit, and a melting point of 122 degrees Fahrenheit -Liquids – this chart helps identify fire temperature by showing the flash point and ignition temperature of liquids. For example, the chart shows that brake fluid has a flash point between 240-355 degrees Fahrenheit, and an ignition temperature between 536-644 degrees Fahrenheit. Analyzing Fire Damage (2/2) Fire Damage Repair Considerations Effects of Heat on Vehicle Parts -Smoke and Heat Damage – aside from creating stains fabrics, smoke or heat damage also has a bearing on whether a repair or replacement will be necessary -Repair vs. Replace – if there was minor damage to the vehicle, there will always be the question, “What is repairable, and what must be replaced?’ As a general rule, smoke damage may be repairable, whereas heat damage generally requires part replacement. For example, if plastic trim has melted, the seat has burned, or the headliner is scorched, replacement is required -Smoke and Soot – smoke and soot enter all areas of the vehicle, such as under seats, into air vents, and behind door panels. It permeates all fabrics, such as: -Headliners -Carpeting -Seats -Note: The problem is being able to remove all the smoke residue and completely neutralize the smoke odor. This task is not easily accomplished and requires special procedures and products. Even if the smoke odor is removed, often the customer still has memory of it and may claim they can still smell the odor, even if a neutral third party could not -Fire Damage Repair Considerations – often, fires leave a heavy amount of fire extinguisher retardant, soot, and water that can make damage appear worse than it is. To begin, the vehicle interior is generally removed. This requires removal of the seats, carpet, headliner, door panels, and plastic trim, which allows the repair facility to assess what is truly damaged -Fire Extinguisher Retardant – if a fire extinguisher retardant was used, it may be helpful to know what type in order to effectively clean the vehicle. For example, extinguishers that use water, carbon dioxide, potassium bicarbonate, or sodium bicarbonate can be mopped or vacuumed out of the vehicle interior or removed with a mild solution of vinegar and water. Monoammonium phosphate and foams require slightly more aggressive methods, hand scrubbing and water dilution -Soot – with soot, it is important to begin the cleaning process as soon as possible. Soot residue is acidic and can cause damage to metal, plastics, etc. if left to sit for a period of time. Soot can turn parts a yellowish color if not removed quickly from the surface. Quick removal will limit the amount of etching into the surface of vehicle parts. Note: Soot is a fine particulate that can work its way into just about any area of a vehicle. For this reason, the entire vehicle must be thoroughly wiped down -Cleaning Process – one type of cleaning process includes the following: -The fabric parts are vacuumed to remove soot, ash, and any chemicals used to extinguish the fire. These are easier to remove when dry -All the seats and carpeting are shampooed and pressure-washed -The vehicle interior is pressure-washed -All parts that have been exposed to water are considered for repair or replacement -Note: Some items, such as chrome trim on door handles or console, can etch or tarnish pretty quickly, so if the soot is not removed promptly, new parts will need to be installed -Odor Removal – to remove the fire odor that has permeated the vehicle, cleaning companies may use specific processes. All areas must be cleaned, including air ducts -Traditional Cleaning Chemicals – traditional cleaning chemicals, such as soap and water, are generally used at first to remove the physical residue of the fire. This residue is the primary source of the odor, so removal of this layer is a good start -Special Chemicals – some chemicals are specifically formulated to neutralize the smell of burnt plastic. They are used on all fabric and on paintwork, which absorb the fire residue that causes odors. The chemicals used on plastics themselves are designed to block the smell chemically. The odor is difficult to remove, so the only option is to find a solution that permanently blocks it. Smells are often trapped in plastics, as the heat of a fire allows the pores in the plastic to open and trap contaminants -Fog Solution – a fog solution can be used on the vehicle interior. Fog is the only material that can go where smoke goes. Special machines with a heated element are designed to turn a liquid deodorant into a fog. -Ozone Machines – odors have characteristics similar to a frequency. If you use another odor with the opposite ‘frequency’, the smoke odor can be cancelled out, or neutralized. Ozone machines attack and break apart smoke molecules that causes the odor. -Smoke/Heat Damage on Glass – the type of heat damage to glass depends on the type of glass. For example, tempered glass may hold up to higher temperatures, but can be etched by the acidic smoke from the fire. Laminated glass can also be etched from smoke, but heat can create air bubbles in the laminate, essentially destroying a windshield or laminated door glass -Heat (Fire) Effect on Steel – the effect of heat on steel: -Alters the strength of the part -Changes the mechanical properties. Heat tends to strengthen mild steels, weaken high-strength steels, and completely destroy the strength of most ultra-high strength steels. -Note: The amount of heat and rate at which it is applied, as well as the cooling rate, can have a dramatic effect on the mechanical properties of the steel. Mild steels tend to become more brittle when heated, while some of the higher strength steels may become softer and more formable. This may lead to a part that was intended to transfer collision energy actually absorbing it instead, and a part that should absorb energy being hard enough to either crack or transfer the energy instead -Structural Integrity – high-strength steel (HSS) and ultra-high-strength steel (UHSS) are altered by the application of heat. Heat makes HSS and UHSS softer, more malleable, or weaker, essentially losing their high tensile strength. Most vehicle makers recommend against the use of heat on their structural parts. Heat is generally not recommended unless the part is made from mild steel, a type of steel where heat application will not affect the integrity of the steel. Mild steel is used on many non-structural parts, such as exterior body panels -Heat Exposure – more intense fires will weaken the steel, while lower heat will leave the steel properties as originally designed. Knowing which is the case, of course, would require determining how much heat the part was exposed to. If the fire was quickly extinguished and the paint on the part is mostly intact, it is likely there was not enough heat to affect the structural strength of the steel. However, if most of the engine compartment was consumed and portions of the paint have been burned off, it may be assumed that temperatures were above what is required for the steel to maintain its structural strength. Note: It is also important to verify the type of steel that has been exposed to heat. Some HSS parts can be heated, while most UHSS cannot -Heat Indicators – paint on a part can become a heat indicator. Knowing at what temperatures paint starts to burn or melt can provide indications of the maximum fire temperature. Clearcoats and topcoats can start to burn at about 450 degrees Fahrenheit, while zinc coatings start to burn at approximately 750 degrees Fahrenheit. So if all the coatings have been burned, it could be a good estimate that the heat was at least 750 degrees Fahrenheit. It may be helpful to look at the opposite side of the part. Looking on the inside of a rail can provide an indication that heat temperatures rose even higher than the 750 degree fehrenheit at which zinc melts, since the inside of the part was away from the area of direct heat. To perform this type of inspection, a borescope may be used to visually inspect inside a rail -Heat Effect on Foams/Adhesives – heat is one of the primary sources used to loosen adhesive and separate a bonded part. After an adhesive is heated, it loses its bonding properties. For example, in an engine fire, heat can cause the exterior hood panel to separate from the inner structure. Foams are built into inner structures, such as B-pillars, rocker panels, and quarter panels. When exposed to heat, these can also separate from the vehicle structure. For example, if a vehicle is parked next to a fire that exposes it to high heat, the temperature could cause the flutter foam that is used to attach the door skin to the intrusion beam to detach. Note: In higher temperature fires, foams, and adhesives can ignite, essentially burning the vehicle from inside the tubular structures -Heat Effect on Electronics – electronics are very sensitive to heat and smoke. A typical vehicle fire has smoke (soot), humidity from burning fluids, and of course heat. All three of these are problematic for sensitive electronic parts that are used throughout most late model vehicles. Soot residue has the potential to short-circuit parts by bridging the circuits within the part. Additionally, soot can create a layer over the heat-producing parts of an electronic component, providing almost an insulating effect – resulting in overheating of the part. Note: Soot leaves limited repair options for control modules and other vehicle electronics. Some companies offer services to repair these particular pars, and it becomes a business decision to determine whether or not the repair is cost-effective Analyzing Flood Damage (1/2) Flood Damage Identification and Health Concerns Flood Level Indicators -Determining Flood Level – determining the height that the floodwater reached on a vehicle is one of the key factors in determining whether a vehicle is repairable. For this reason, it is also one of the first things an estimator or auto physical damage appraiser (APDA) will do. Flood levels are often found as dirty water lines on outside panels of the vehicle -Flood Level Indicators – not all vehicles have exterior panel lines deposited by the flood, especially if the water is clean or if subsequent rains wash the flood lines off the outside panels. In this situation other moisture indicators must be examined. These generally include: -Wet paper or materials in the glove box -Water lines on interior trim or seats -Evidence of debris in the radiator or air conditioning condenser – the fins tend to trap residue, creating a clear water level line -Water in the trunk or spare tire tub -Interior Moisture Indicators – moisture can wick upward on water-saturated cushions, so even if the tops of the seat cushions feel dry, look beneath the seats for evidence of moisture. Some rear seats can be removed easily to check the foam underneath for saturation. Check for evidence of mildew or mold – this type of damage depends on how long the vehicle sat without cleaning. Similar to seat cushions, floodwaters that soak into the jute behind the carpeting will allow the water to wick up farther than the actual floodwater level, especially in the cowl area. For this reason, it is important to look at all the indicators to determine flood level -Additional Moisture Indicators – look for fresh corrosion or silt inside the exhaust tailpipe, pockets on door trim panels filled with water, and interior cup holders filled with water. Uncoated corroded fasteners on the inside of the vehicle are a good indication that they were once under water. A completely corroded rotor would be an indicator that flood water rose above that part of the vehicle, provided the vehicle has not sat too long. Partially corroded rotors can provide floodwater levels, provided the vehicle was not driven. Also note that all rotors corrode eventually, so if the vehicle has been sitting for a couple weeks, corrosion will start to form. -Length of Floodwater Exposure – the length of exposure to floodwaters reduces the likelihood of repairs. For example, a flash flood may offer more repair options than floods where vehicles remained submerged for several days. Other items that may contribute to the repairability considerations include potential body damage if a vehicle is pushed by floodwaters, contacting stationary objects or other vehicles as it flows with the current Total Loss Indicators -Total Loss indicators – floodwater up to the instrument panel, regardless of the cleanliness of the water is one indicator that a vehicle would be a total loss. Other indicators include saltwater or brackish water over the rocker panels, and water over the breather hose in the transmission. Note: Water that has risen up to the instrument panel generally totals the vehicle -Total Loss Threshold – older model vehicles that are not equipped with as many electronics may not be subjected to the extent of damage experienced by late model vehicles. One of the biggest issues with flood-damaged vehicles is that it is almost impossible to determine how many systems were affected by floodwaters. Systems that initially appear to be undamaged often fail several months later -Total Loss Guidelines – flood damage laws are state and local, not federal. Some states, depending on their laws, require the vehicle to have a flood title if water reaches the rocker panels. If not decided by state law, each insurance company may have different flood guidelines based on flood lines, options, number of computers, sensor locations, air intake/vent locations, etc. Flood Fraud Indicators -I-CAR Position Statement – this I-CAR training course has been designed to identify potential indicators of fraud and the issues related to damage analysis that may warrant additional investigation. I-CAR is not in the position to recommend how situations that might involve an element of fraud should be handled. The investigation and handling of these situations is a highly sensitive matter, and one which must respect the relationship, rights, and obligations that exist between an insurer and its customers. All situations that involve potential indicators of fraud and related damages should be handled according to the policies, practices, and procedures of the insurance company involved. While it is not recommended to go into every claim suspecting fraud, it is important to be able to identify the common signs of fraud. Some of these signs include: -Vague or inconsistent details regarding the claim -Something out of character -Physical indications that are not consistent with the claim -Fraud Indicators -Fraud is an unfortunate reality of the claims industry. There is a small percentage of vehicle owners that intentionally vandalize their vehicle in order to receive insurance compensation. Common reasons fraud may occur include that the customer is looking to total the vehicle, increase repair amounts, or receive cash to cover deductibles. Common types of flood fraud include: -Using a garden hose to flood the interior -Intentionally driving into an ocean, lake, or river -Intentionally driving into dep water during heavy rains -Common flood fraud indicators include: -Freshwater damage when the floodwater was supposed to be saltwater -The vehicle interior is water damaged, but there is no moisture in the trunk or engine compartment Flood Damage Health Concerns -Personal Protective Equipment – depending on how long the vehicle has been sitting before inspection, molds and bacteria can start to grow. The greenhouse effect on the vehicle interior turns into a virtual petri dish. Therefore, proper personal protection, such as respirators, nitrile gloves, and safety glasses, are necessary when examining some flood-damaged vehicles. The protection used depends on the cleanliness of the water. In some instances, depending on the biological contaminants, the vehicle may require demolition. For example, many of the vehicles that were flooded by Hurricane Katrina were destroyed due to the length of exposure and the type of water exposure. Note: Ungloved hands or other body parts exposed to damp vehicle parts should be thoroughly washed after inspection -Health Concerns – one of the most noticeable items when inspecting a flood-damaged vehicle is the odor of the interior. Mildew, mold, or decaying organic material, especially under the heated conditions that occur inside a vehicle, can create a pungent smell. Vehicles that have been exposed to floodwaters, particularly brackish water, saltwater, or river water, may have mold growth. Mold can start to grow beneath the carpeting, seats, floor mats, filters, and other areas that trap moisture. Floodwater may contain E.coli and other harmful bacteria. Vehicles that are not properly and promptly cleaned, dried, and disinfected will experience some sort of bacterial growth that can cause respiratory problems for vehicle drivers and/or repair technicians. Drying out the inside as quickly as possible is critical to limiting the amount of potential contamination -Cabin Filter and HVAC Inspection – cabin filters are often beneath the dash, which can be exposed to low-level floodwaters. Similar to the air intake filter, these can start to create mold once they have been saturated. Heating and air conditioning (A/C) vents are often placed at floor level. These fill with floodwater, even in a low-level flood. If left untreated, these areas can be a breeding ground for mold, mildew, and bacteria. The evaporator case for the A/C system can also fill with floodwater. This piece, if left untreated, can create an odor problem in the vehicle when operating the A/C Analyzing Flood Damage (2/2) Effects of Water on Vehicle Parts Flood Damage Inspection Considerations -Part Design and Floodwater – not all parts are damaged by water. Some parts of a vehicle are designed to withstand repeated exposure to the outside environment. Therefore, one of the considerations during damage analysis is to determine if a part is designed to get wet. Some parts can withstand moisture, such as road splash or heavy rains, but not complete submersion. For example, an exhaust system can take quite a lot of moisture, but complete submersion will put water into the engine. However, brake system pads and rotors can take submersion for a short period of time -Flood-Damaged Electric Vehicles – vehicle makers have various warnings and recommendations for dealing with submerged hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) and electric vehicles (EVs). However, from a safety standpoint, there is no electrocution danger to an occupant or rescue personnel from a vehicle that is submerged. Batteries that have submerged will short-circuit internally and lose their charge. Flood-damaged hybrid batteries must be replaced. Drain the water from the vehicle, if possible. Manually disable the HV system using vehicle maker procedures Engine Compartment Inspection -Air Cleaner Housing – the air intake provides a good indicator when determining the height of the floodwater or whether or not water may have entered the engine. Removing the air cleaner cap and checking air filter for dampness will determine if the floodwaters reached that height -Air Cleaner Housing, Continued – in some instances, depending on how long it has been since the flood occurred, the air filter will have mold and other contaminants starting to grow on the filter. If moisture is not evident on the air filter, it is still a good idea to remove the air filter and check the housing for moisture beneath the filter. The presence of water is a good indication that there may be water inside the engine -Mass Airflow Sensor – if the air intake was flooded, it is likely the mass airflow sensor was also exposed to floodwater. Exposure to water may be indicated by white oxidation on the connector prongs. The mass airflow sensor is located inside the intake air duct. This sensor is used to measure the amount of air entering the engine. Water damage to the sensor can cause stalling, misfiring, poor acceleration, and the malfunction indicator lamp (MIL) to illuminate -Engine Oil – another method of checking for water in the engine is to check oil levels. Levels that are above the full line on the dipstick or signs of moisture on the dipstick generally indicate that water has seeped into the system. If the engine was running when exposed to floodwater, the oil will have an appearance similar to that of chocolate milk, a light brown color. Any signs of contamination require, at a minimum, the oil to be drained from the engine -Engine Contamination – with no obvious signs of water in the engine, it may be helpful for the estimator or APDA to ask the customer if the engine was running when flood conditions occurred. If the engine was not running, repairs may be a possibility. However, if water entered the engine, corrosion can start immediately on the cylinder walls and piston rings. The pitting from corrosion can cause the engine to burn oil and run unevenly when started again. -Hydrolock – if the vehicle was running when it entered deep water, followed by the engine shutting down, it is more likely that serious damage has occurred. Often, a condition known as ‘hydrolock’ can occur. Hydrolock is when water enters the engine and the floods the cylinder. Water, unlike air, does not compress. When the pistons try to compress water on the upstroke, a variety of problems can occur. These include: -Bearing problems -Broken seals -Bent or broken connecting rods – even a minor bend can scar the cylinder wall, and this damage may be evident by a knocking sound when the vehicle is started -Fractured head or block -Crankcase damage -Air Intake Locations – water is often brought into the engine through the air intake. Intake locations vary, but are generally higher in the engine compartment. The air intake location in the engine compartment determines the water level required to flood the engine. For example, an air intake that is lower on the vehicle will flood the engine at a much lower level compared to an air intake that is higher up -Engine Damage and Speed Considerations – if the engine locked up while the vehicle was being driven, the odds of mechanical damage are fairly high. However, if the engine was idling or being driven at very low speeds, water is slowly introduced into the system. This means that severe mechanical damage is less likely. It is important to ask the vehicle owner how the engine came to a stop. Was the owner trying to move through the water quickly, or was the vehicle at a standstill -Engine Flood Repair Options – the engine should never be started if there is evidence that moisture has entered the engine. This may hydrolock the engine. Engines exposed to clean water may be repairable. Generally this requires disconnecting the battery cables. Remove the spark plugs and turn the engine over by hand to ensure that it turns over normally – using the starter to turn the engine can cause additional damage if there are problems. Remove all moisture from the cylinders. Disassemble and clean the engine – any parts that show corrosion should be replaced -Transmission – water in the transmission can sometimes be evident by water droplets on the dipstick. Some systems do not have a dipstick. In this situation, if contamination is suspected, it is recommended to drain a small amount of fluid and have it tested for moisture contamination. If the vehicle was running, the transmission fluid will have an appearance similar to a pink milkshake. -Water Entering the Transmission – although the transmission seems like a completely sealed system, water can enter either through the dipstick, if equipped, or through a vent. All transmissions have this vent to maintain equal barometric pressure inside of the transmission. When the vehicle is exposed to flood conditions, and the water level is at or above the vent, the water will cool the unit, lowering the internal temperature and drawing water inside the transmission -Water Exposure Considerations – water that enters the transmission is difficult to simply ‘flush out’. There is some equipment available that can be used to extract the water from the system. Exposure to water may cause internal damage to the transmission. Water can dissolve the water-based glues that vehicle makers commonly use to bond friction material to the transmission clutch plates. Additionally, depending on the length of time exposed to water, the internal parts can start to corrode. Following a flood, this internal damage may require transmission to be overhauled -Other Fluid Inspection – when inspecting underhood, the levels in the power steering reservoir, brake fluid reservoir, and coolant reservoir should be checked. Excessive levels may mean that water has entered the system. Brake fluid absorbs water and does not separate. Therefore, testers are available for determining the amount of moisture in the brake fluid. However, water and power steering fluid do not mix, so water in the system will be evident. -Checking for Moisture – moisture can seep into drivetrain and suspension parts submerged in water for an extended period of time. Damaged parts may include: -CV joints -Tie rod ends -Wheel bearings -Hub assemblies -Gasoline tanks -Crankshaft and transmission seals -Front and/or rear differentials -Note: Front and/or rear differential damage is also common on vehicles that submerge the back end when launching watercraft. All contaminated fluids or grease should be changed out to prevent any further damage to the systems and the damaged parts replaced -Checking Electronic Systems – other areas of the brake system that can be affected by flood damage include the electronic systems that control the vehicle braking. These systems include the anti-lock braking system (ABS), traction control, and electronic stability control. These systems have sensors and control modules that monitor and engage the systems when necessary. Note: If brake system electronics are flood-damaged, they may not work as designed and could present a safety hazard Vehicle Interior Inspection -Trunk and Storage Tub Inspection – water often pools in lower areas of the vehicle. This includes the spare tire tub in the trunk and interior storage tubs commonly found in minivans. It is important to note that with the spare tire tub, levels may not always be as they appear. When vehicles are towed, the front end may be lifted and the water may drain to the rear of the vehicle, creating a higher water line than the rest of the vehicle. Look for consistencies throughout the vehicle when estimating the water level. Note: The truck inspection includes checking the spare tire cover. These may become waterlogged and the board material can warp or split from exposure to moisture -Doors – the height of the floodwater may be determined by examining the door trim panel for water lines in addition to any stains that may have occurred from the flooding process. However, what is difficult to examine are the parts behind the door trim panel. This includes: -The window regulator (power and manual) -Power door locks -Switches for door locks and power windows -Door lamps -Power mirror switches -Note: In some cases, there are even pressure switches for side airbag deployment. Depending on the length of exposure, some switches and window regulators may be able to be disassembled and cleaned. This will require dismantling the door and removing the interior parts to check and clean the individual parts -Seats – seats can be basic or contain multiple electronic systems that can be affected by floodwater. When inspecting the seat, items that can be damaged from flood include the seat fabric (leather or cloth) and the seat foam. If either is not properly dried, there will be a mold problem. Even if the seat looks and feels dry, the foam padding absorbs moisture. This moisture can be felt on the underside of the seat, and may even leak out of the seat cushion when it is compressed by hand -Seat Tracks – the seat track and the seat adjustments often start to rust immediately. After several weeks, if not properly repaired or replace, these items will seize up from corrosion. Other items to consider when analyzing seats include the seat position sensor and occupant classification sensor (OCS), seat heaters, airbag modules, and electronic seat adjustment motors. Any restraint system parts should be replaced if exposed to floodwater -Removing Stains from Flood-Damaged Fabrics – stains from flood damage are common interior trim pieces used on doors, B-pillars, A-pillars, and so on. Stains may also be found on carpeting and seat fabric. With the proper removal techniques and materials, stains can be removed. Common stains in carpets and seats are mostly acidic, or below 7 on the pH scale. These are generally protein-based stains and can be neutralized with an alkaline solution, such as all-purpose cleaner. Alkaline stains, such as fresh eggs or water spots, can be neutralized with a mild acid solution, such as vinegar and water. Common stains enter in a liquid, which then evaporates leaving only the pigments. The stain must be made into a liquid again so it can be easily removed. -Cleaning and Odor Removal – with the seats and carpeting removed for drying, clean out any silt or organic material from the floor and floor-mounted vents. Special cleaners, some formulated with enzymes, may be used. This type of cleaning solution can be used on fabric, plastic, metal, etc. Pressure washers with heated water can also be used to clean the removed carpeting. Once cleaned, the carpeting is left to air dry. Carpeting with a jute backing may not be salvageable. -Fogging – a fogger is a type of cleaner used to remove odor and contamination from flood vehicles. This process turns special chemicals into airborne particles that can get into all interior areas of the vehicle Vehicle Electrical Inspection -Wiring Harnesses and Connectors – while the wiring harnesses themselves are protected from water, because such wire is encased in insulation, the problems arise from floodwater contamination of the harness connector. Connectors will corrode. Even the slightest amount of corrosion can cause problems, since corrosion will increase the resistance in a circuit. Since many of the systems are low voltage/low amperage, meaning they run on millivolts and milliamps, small changes may cause the system to fail, or illuminate a MIL. If the system was energized when the flood occurred, corrosion beings immediately. Note: To avoid further corrosion, it is beneficial to disconnect the battery as soon as possible when a flooded vehicle is brought in for repair -Cleaning Connectors – the connectors can be cleaned. This requires removing water with compressed air, cleaning with a solvent, and brushing to remove any surface corrosion. Some cleaning materials are designed to dissolve the corrosion on contact. After the contacts are cleaned, they may be treated with dielectric grease to prevent any future corrosion. It is recommended to avoid using mechanical methods to clean connectors. Using an abrasive-type material to remove corrosion can scar or gouge the surface of the metal, leaving it open to further corrosion. While repairs to wiring harnesses and connectors may be possible, they will likely be limited by the duration of exposure and type of water. Note: Too much corrosion, or corrosion that has pitted the surface of the metal, may inhibit the effectiveness of any repairs -Vehicle Lamps – headlamps that were submerged often have sediment and moisture on the interior of the lens. If the lamps were on when the vehicle encountered flood conditions, it is possible the quick cool of the water may have destroyed the bulb. Additionally, the system could have short-circuited during the submersion. Similarly, this can occur with turn signals or tail lamps. Depending on the type of headlamp assembly, additional problems can arise. For example, vehicles with adaptive front lighting (headlamps that swivel or tilt), may have issues with the motors not functioning properly, problems with the wiring connectors, or problems with the sensors. -Control Modules and Computers – when writing an estimate on a vehicle, it is helpful to have knowledge of where the control modules and related system sensors are located. If the flood only reached the floor pan, that could still cause potential problems, since most of the control modules and sensors are mounted lower on the vehicle. If a control module is submerged in water for a period of time, as a general rule, it should be replaced. Vehicle computers are no different than any other computer; if water seeps into the housing they may work for a short bit after being dried out, but long-term effects of the water may lead to a malfunctioning part. -Restraint Systems – seat belt mechanisms exposed to floodwater must be replaced since they corrode over a short period of time. While the webbing may be cleaned based on the type of water, retractor mechanisms will corrode, causing a lock-up when trying to extend the seat belt. Many vehicles are equipped with seat belt pre-tensioners. When exposed to floodwater, these devices cannot be dried out, or disassembled and cleaned. Cleaning the connectors and assembly will not ensure a proper deployment in a collision. If submerged in floodwater, pre-tensioners must be replaced. -Airbag Replacements – replace any airbags if they were submerged in floodwater. There is no repair or reconditioning procedure. Generally, if the water reaches the airbags on a vehicle, the vehicle is totalled since the waterhas risen at least to the instrument panel. However, as with all restraint system parts, do not recycle or use these parts on collision-damaged vehicles -Airbag Deployment – in some instances, airbag deployment may occur in a flooded vehicle due to a short circuit in the system. This can occur from corroding contacts and a battery that is still connected. The longer the vehicle sits without being dried out, the greater the possibility for an airbag deployment. For this reason, if entering a vehicle for inspection, checking mileage, or seeing if the engine turns over, be aware that this is a possibility. If the ignition must be turned on, do not reach through the steering wheel to turn the key -Cleaning Electronics – vehicle electronic parts may include stereo equipment, LCD monitors, alarm systems, navigation systems, back-up cameras, and a number of other convenience, communication, and safety systems. There are some companies that will work to save vehicle electronics, which generally requires disassembling and drying the parts and circuits, and then applying a product that will remove any corrosion from the metal parts. However, permanent damage may occur, especially if there was an electrical current flowing through the part as it was submerged. If a part was submerged in fresh, clean water, and only for a short period of time, the likelihood of saving the part increases. Note: Cleaning flood-damaged electronics does not guarantee they will work for an extended period of time. Analyzing Theft Damage (1/2) Common Stolen Items -Two Types of Vandalism – vandalism commonly occurs in two ways. The first is when someone is intent on damaging the vehicle, either targeting a specific owner and vehicle through an act of vengeance, or through random vandalism. The second type of vandalism occurs from someone who damages the exterior when looking to gain access to the interior for the purpose of theft. This type of damage generally includes broken glass and damaged door lock assemblies. This type of damage can also be in the interior of the vehicle after access has been made -Common Stolen Items – thieves are aware of market demands. For this reason, some vehicles may be stolen for specific parts and taken to a location where the parts are removed. The vehicle is then towed or driven to a remote area and abandoned. Examples of commonly stolen items include the following: -Catalytic converters – which are often sold to scrap yards for their precious metals -Air bags – sone studies concluded there are over 75,000 airbags stolen every year -Wheels/Tires – even wheels with locking lugs can be stolen. Tools are easily available to those with the knowledge of how to remove them, and the proper contacts for accessing the tools -Note: Trucks and SUVs are often targeted for catalytic converters, as it is easy to get underneath the vehicle for removal -Smash and Grab Stolen Items – one of the more common types of theft is the smash and grab, where windows are broken to quickly take items inside. These items include: -ipods/MP3 players -Computers -Portable navigation systems -DVD players -Phones -Purses -Radar detectors -Note: Generally, items that are stolen are easy to remove and/or have a high dollar value OEM and Aftermarket Electronics -Automotive Electronics – Aftermarket – aftermarket stereo equipment, such as radio units, amplifiers, speakers, and TVs, are much easier to steal compared to factory parts, and typically do not require special codes to reactive. During damage analysis, there are steps that can be taken to verify that the vehicle was indeed equipped with certain electronics. These include: -Checking for a wiring harness that would match the description of the stolen part -Asking the vehicle owner for receipts, owner’s manual, or original packaging -Verifying dealership records for dealer-installed equipment -An inline fusible link -A permanent fixture that holds the stereo -Wiring to an amplifier -Larger gauge speaker wire -Part-specific mounting brackets, such as those used for a subwoofer -Note: When dealing with OEM equipment, it is also recommended to check the vehicle build sheet, if available, to see what options were included from the factory -Factory Stereos – in-dash items, such as factory-made stereos, are not as popular to steal as they once were and are rarely stolen. Factory-made stereos are difficult to remove from the dash, and often require specific codes from the vehicle maker to re-active once removed -Instrument Panel Damage – when analyzing theft recovery, check for damage to the instrument panel. This includes: -Damage from aftermarket radio removal -Damage from vandalism, such as cuts, tears, stains, etc. -Broken plastic on the instrument cluster -Fingerprint powder residue, which may be located throughout the vehicle, and will need to be removed Analyzing Theft Damage (2/2) Total Vehicle Theft Initial Inspection of a Recovered Stolen Vehicle -Initial Inspection – when performing an initial inspection following a break-in or theft recovery, it is important to: -Look for damage beyond the obvious area of damage -Determine how the vehicle was entered and/or started -If equipped with an alarm, try to determine how it was defeated -Verify the license plates and registration stickers on the vehicle as still correct -Check fluid levels for the vehicle, such as coolant, brakes, or transmission -Inspect the underbody to identify any damage to the drivetrain and suspension components from rough driving -Damage from Accessing the Interior – common methods thieves use to gain entry to a vehicle include accessing door lock cylinders, or working windows down or to the side to access the vehicle lock mechanism. Therefore, items commonly damaged include: -Door handles and the area around them that become scratched from pry tools, such as screwdrivers -Broken door lock cylinders and ignition cylinders -Weatherstripping and belt moldings -Door frames, which can be bent to access the door lock -Broken window regulators, which will occur when thieves push the window down hard and snap the retainer clips to the glass -Interior trim panels and seats, which are damaged from broken glass -Note: Generally, thieves prefer to keep the window intact so they do not have to sit on broken glass while driving. They may even punch of the vent window, which tends to fall on the floor -Stolen Vehicles – instead of breaking in and stealing parts of the vehicle, some vehicles are stolen and driven somewhere to be disassembled for parts. Vehicles can also be taken for joy rides, where thieves take the vehicle for a short period of time and then abandon it. These types of thefts are typically recovered within 30 days. In some instances, the vehicle may be stolen by towing the vehicle away. In this instance, its necessary to check for damage at jack points or towing points. Thieves rarely take the time to ensure the vehicle is properly attached before hauling it away -VIN Compromising – for recovered theft, it is important to check the vehicle identification number (VIN) plates to make sure that they were not altered or removed. To verify the vehicle has the proper VIN, check the multiple VIN locations on the vehicle, such as the door jamb or trunk floor. Make sure all VIN labels have the same number. To help with VIN tracking, the government developed the Motor Vehicle Theft Law Enforcement Act. This act requires makers of designated high-theft passenger vehicle lines to put the VIN on the engine, the transmission, and 12 major body parts such as fenders, doors, and hoods -Ignition Damage – steering column damage occurs from thieves trying to remove the lock cylinder. Lock cylinders are removed from the housing by: -Chiseling out the cylinder -Using a special tool to pull out the lock cylinder -Note: After the ignition lock cylinder has been removed, a screwdriver, pliers, or other custom tools can then be used to turn the ignition over and start the vehicle. This type of damage typically requires the steering column to be replaced or rebuilt -Theft Versus Prior Damage – as with traditional collision damage, it is important to differentiate between pre-existing damage and damage related to the claim. This requires looking for clues to previous damage. Check for any prior claims on the vehicle. Look for signs of age to the previous damage, such as corrosion. Also examine the consistency to the damage. For example, if there is minor damage to a panel that is not adjacent to where the majority of damage is, it is possible that it is not related to the claim. However, it is difficult in most cases to say for sure, and asking the vehicle owner is generally the only way to verify -The I-CAR Position on Fraud – though this course has focused on best practices and techniques for analyzing theft damage, it also serves to help identify potential indicators of fraud. I-CAR is not in the position to recommend how situations that might involve an element of fraud should be handled. The investigation and handling of these situations is a highly sensitive matter that must respect the relationship, rights, and obligations that exist between an insurer and its customers. All situations that involve potential indicators of fraud and related damages should be handled according to the polices, practices, and procedures of the insurance company involved -Theft and Fraud Inspection Items – there are inspection items that may raise red flags with regard to fraud. One red flag may be a clean vehicle, as thieves typically are not worried about cleanliness. Unplugged wires may also be a red flag, since thieves will usually cut wires to save time. Items that are unscrewed from their mounting may be an indication of fraud, as most items are torn out with little regard for appropriate removal methods, or damage to adjacent parts. It is important to note that these are items to consider. Fraud is a delicate issue that must be handled following specific company policy -Possible Indicators of Fraud with Vehicle Theft – indications of possible fraud regarding vehicle theft include: -Multiple accidents with no repair, or the owner has multiple deductibles -Signs of previous damage -One method that may be used to determine possible fraud is to look at digital images captured from a previous estimate and compare those images with the current claim. Other indications of possible fraud include no signs of forced entry. Typically there is a broken ignition, broken lock cylinder, and damaged door handle, door frame, or door glass. However, vehicle jacking always remains a possibility. With that type of crime, there are no signs of forced entry. For this reason, it is important to verify the vehicle condition with the claimant testimony and police report Analyzing Vandalism Damage (1/2) Analyzing Finish, Interior, Theft Recovery, and Mechanical Damage Finish Damage -Two Types of Vandalism – vandalism commonly occurs in two ways. The first is when someone is intent on damaging the vehicle, either targeting a specific owner and vehicle through an act of vengeance, or through random vandalism. The second type of vandalism occurs from someone who damages the exterior when looking to gain access to the interior for the purpose of theft. This type of damage generally includes broken glass and damaged door lock assemblies. This type of damage can also include damage to the interior of the vehicle after access has been made. -Finish Damage – one of the more common types of vandalism damage is to the vehicle finish. Depending on what was used, damage may be just to the clearcoat. In this instance, detailing or refinishing may be required depending on the depth of damage. Finish damage may also be through either the topcoats or all the finish layers. This will always require the panel to be refinished -Eggs – eggs are commonly used to vandalize vehicles. While eggs seem fairly harmless, they can etch clearcoat if left on the panel for an extended period of time or simply allowed to dry into the finish. Eggs are slightly alkaline, with a 7.6-7.8 on the pH scale, so even this small amount of alkalinity will damage the clearcoat. The impact of egg shells may chip or crack the finish, depending on how hard they are thrown at the vehicle. Damage not related to the impact can generally be avoided with immediate removal of the egg yolks and egg whites -Key Scratches – key scratches are generally deep scratches into the vehicle finish. When analyzing repair options for key scratches, the depth of the scratch determines repair options. If only the upper layer of the clearcoat is scratched, and a fingernail does not catch on the scratch, buffing may be a repair option. Deeper scratches, where a fingernail catches on the scratch, require refinishing. This is generally the more common type of key scratch. Note: Vehicle makers may provide a recommendation regarding the amount of clearcoat that can be removed from a panel. Limits are put in place to prevent excessive amounts of clearcoat from being removed. If too much clearcoat is removed, paint failure may occur. Most vehicle makers recommend not removing more than 0.5 mil of clearcoat. This will require monitoring the finish thickness during the buffing process -Spray Paint – spray-painted graffiti is a very deliberate form of vandalism. Spray paint removal products are available to remove graffiti from a finish. Spray paint, or graffiti, on a vehicle surface may require a variety of repair techniques based on the spray paint chemistry. Common types of spray paint are made from: -Acrylic -Epoxy -Latex -Note: In addition to vandalism, other types of paint-related damage may include house paint, road paint, or other types of industrial overspray -Spray Paint Removal – graffiti removal may require using detailing clay. Detailing clay used with a water-based lubricant can be used to remove some forms of overspray and paint on non-porous (smooth) surfaces, such as glass and metal. In some instances, a pressure washer may be used to remove latex-based paint. Another option for removing graffiti spray paint, permanent marker, or other staining products include specifically designed products such as graffiti remover. These are either petroleum-based or water-based. It is important to note that before using this type of product, it should be verified that it is compatible with automotive finishes. When using chemical cleaners, always test the effects of the cleaner on an inconspicuous area to determine that the surface will not become damaged from the cleaner. -Miscellaneous Fluids – other types of fluid that may be used to vandalize a vehicle include: -Battery acid -Paint thinner -Brake fluid -Note: These should be removed as soon as possible to prevent etching the clearcoat or even deeper into the finish. Generally, materials such as this will require neutralizing the fluid, followed by refinishing the panel -What Custom Finish Repairs may Require – if the clearcoat scratches cannot be repaired with buffing, repair to custom finishes may require determining the refinishing process, and finding documentation about the finish from the company that painted the vehicle. Custom finishes may also require stripping an entire panel. Unlike a traditional finish, custom finishes are difficult to blend, such as in situations where the color is a custom mix or has a very detailed air brush design that cannot be duplicated without a complete refinish Interior Damage -Common Damage to Interior Items – vandals that gain access to the vehicle interior can do considerable damage. Common types of damage include: -Instrument panel, trim, and wiring (when the radio is stolen) -Cut/scratched door panels from the broken glass -Slashed seats/upholstery -Slashed airbag covers. There are no repair options for this type of damage. The slashed airbag covers require replacement of the airbag module -Stains on seats -Stained or cut carpeting -Contamination from various material -Note: International water damage is also a common type of vandalism. This may require replacement of carpeting, as oftentimes it is difficult to completely dry the matting that is attached to the carpeting. This can result in mold problems. Also, the floor of many vehicles now contains control modules and wiring harnesses that can be damaged from excessive moisture -Torn Seat Cover Damage Analysis – seats that are slashed may require replacement of the: -Fabric, if it is sold separately from the seat -Seat cushion -Seat cushion and fabric, if they are sold together -Seat cushion heaters -Side impact airbag module, if it is integrated into the seat back -Note: When replacing the fabric or seat cushion, some vehicle makers recommend disabling the passive restraint system if the side airbag is integrated in with the seat. Many passenger seats are equipped with an occupant detection system that includes a bladder that can be damaged if punctured. This would require replacement of the occupant detection parts and recalibration of the system. Which parts are replaced is dependent on the vehicle maker. Reference the vehicle service information for a specific list. Even if the detection system is not damaged, some vehicle makers recommend replacing the sensor if replacing the cushion. Note: Stains may also require removal. The method used depends on the material that caused the stain -Damage from Accessing the Interior – damaged door handles or ignition cylinders are indications that the vehicle was forcefully accessed and driven -Gaining Vehicle Access – gaining vehicle access is one of the first steps in stealing a vehicle. Common methods include accessing a door lock cylinder, or working with windows down or pushing them to the side to access the lock mechanism. Therefore, items commonly damaged during vehicle access include: -Door handles and surrounding areas, which can become scratched from pry tools -Door lock cylinders -Broken ignition cylinders -Weatherstripping and belt moldings -Door frames, which can be bent from being pulled out to access the door locks -Broken window regulators. Sometimes thieves will push the window down hard and snap the retainer clips to the glass -Other Access Methods – in some instances, the vehicle may be stolen by towing the vehicle away. In this instance, its necessary to check for damage at jack points or towing points. Thieves rarely take the time to ensure the vehicle is properly attached before hauling it away. When stealing vehicles, generally, the thieves prefer to keep the window intact so they do not have to sit on the glass while driving. Some may punch of the vent window, as that would tend to fall on the floor; however, this missing piece of glass may be an indication to police that the vehicle was stolen Theft Recovery and Mechanical Damage -Initial Inspection – when doing an initial inspection following a theft recovery, it is important to look for vehicle damage beyond the obvious areas of damage. Determine how the vehicle was entered and started. If equipped with an alarm system, determine how the system was bypassed. Check for cut battery cables, as this could be an indication of how the alarm was bypassed. This is also recommended for break-in thefts. Look for missing items from the interior. Verify that the license plates are still on the vehicle. Make sure the vehicle registration stickers are still on the license plates. These can be taken off and reattached to another plate. The entire vehicle should be inspected for damage, including checking the fluid levels to confirm that all fluids are full and have not been contaminated, and checking the underbody, including the exhaust and suspension, looking for signs of damage from impact, hard driving, or going off road -Under Hood Damage – common items that may be damaged under hood include wire harnesses and radiator hoses, which both can be cut. It is rare to find under hood items that are vandalized in this manner, as more vehicle designs enclose the engine compartment. This generally requires access to the vehicle interior so that the hood latch can be disengaged. With any vandalism damage, it is important to perform a complete inspection inside the vehicle, outside the vehicle, under hood, and underbody. Covering all areas ensures that any hidden damage is found and analyzed -Tire and Wheel Damage – if one tire is damaged, there may be damage to others, thus all four tires should be checked. When analyzing theft recovery, check the tires and wheels for excessive tire wear, tire wear spots, gouges, scuffed, dented, or gouged wheels, and damaged or missing hubcaps. Also, check the spare tire to make sure it is still in place. Slashed tires are tires that have been intentionally punctured through various methods, such as knives and ice picks, or cut valve stems. Tire repairability depends on the damage location. For example, the tread area is sometimes repairable, but sidewalls are not repairable due to safety concerns. Also, for vehicles equipped with tire pressure monitoring systems, the system sensor on the wheel should be checked to make sure it was not damaged. To verify that the tire pressure monitoring system is still functioning, turn the vehicle on and make sure the tire pressure monitoring system warning light is off Analyzing Vandalism Damage (2/2) Fuel Contamination Damage Fuel Contamination – contaminating the fuel tank has been a popular form of vandalism for some time. Contaminants that have been used by vandals include: -Sand -Sugar -Dirt -Water -Fire extinguisher residue -Soda water -Varnish and paint -Note: most solid contaminants do not dissolve in gasoline or diesel fuel, and will clog the fuel filter and fuel injectors. Some may even damage the fuel pump, but rarely do larger, granular-type contaminants make it to the engine. However, some contaminants, such as soda water, can make it to the engine and disable it. -Obtaining a Fuel Sample – to determine if there is fuel contamination, take a fuel sample from a fuel line leading out of the fuel tank into the engine. When extracting the sample: -Fill a clean glass container with fuel -Operate the fuel pump to gather 0.5 L (one pint) of fluid -Allow the sample to sit for 5 minutes or longer to allow sediment to gather, if it exists -Note: When servicing fuel systems, if any fuel spills on your skin, immediately wash the affected area with soap and water. If your clothing becomes saturated with fuel, remove the clothing immediately. Always wear safety glasses, ventilate the area to control fuel vapor buildup, and plug or cap all fuel system openings when removing or disconnecting fuel system parts. It is also recommended to clean up spilled fuel immediately, and to avoid sparks and other sources of ignition. -Determining Fuel Contamination – fuel contaminants are just about anything that can make it down a fuel filler neck. When determining fuel contamination, check the fuel filter for large amounts of solid contaminants. Gasoline is a preservative and items like sugar will not dissolve. It may be necessary to have the fuel analyzed by an independent laboratory. There are generally three levels of testing available. More basic, or level one tests, simply determine that the fuel is contaminated. More extensive testing, or a level three test, will indicate the type of contaminant. The extent of testing varies depending on the desired results. Note: If doing outside testing, it is recommended to use the container provided by the testing facility to ensure the container is free of contaminants that may taint the results. When shipping fuel samples to a testing laboratory, technicians must follow the proper shipping regulations regarding transportation of hazardous fluids -Wrong Fuel – in some instances, fuel contamination is not deliberate. People may inadvertently mix the wrong fuels at a gas station. For example, some may mix E85 and E10. Unless the vehicle is specifically equipped for E85 fuel, using E85 can cause drivability conditions and deterioration of some fuel system parts. People may also inadvertently mix gasoline and diesel, and water and gasoline. While the vehicle owner generally does not add water to the tank, some service stations can have leaky storage tanks that allow water to flow into the supply. Some vehicle makers may have specific test kits that allow technicians to check for the presence of excess alcohol or water in the fuel system. Some vehicle makers may also have specific recommendations and tools for purging the fuel system of E85 and other contaminants. Note: Many vehicle owners mistakenly add the Diesel Exhaust Fluid (DEF) to the fuel tank vs the DEF tank which causes a contamination issues with the fuel, and often leads to replacing a number of fuel system components. -Engine Oil Contamination – another type of vandalism that may occur is adding contaminants directly into the crankcase to lock up the engine. This requires access to the engine compartment, so this type of damage is less common. Common contaminants added to the crankcase are sand or dirt. Some indications that there may have been foul play may be residual sand or dirt around the oil cap. To verify whether contamination actually occurred, engine oil may be analyzed for contaminants, similar to how the fuel is analyzed. If water is in the crankcase, it should be verified that it was intentional. This can be done by checking for a cracked block, damaged head gasket, or other areas that would allow moisture into the engine. As with fuel, not all contamination is deliberate. Some cases are accidental, for example adding the wrong fluid to a reservoir (power steering fluid added to the brake fluid reservoir, windshield wiper fluid added to the power steering fluid reservoir). Improper fluid can cause damage. For example, the wrong brake fluid can disintegrate the seals on some systems Auto Physical Damage Appraiser (APDA) Administration APDA Administrative Duties Assignments/Planning Routes -Introduction to the Job Duties of the APDA – in addition to estimating responsibilities, an auto physical damage appraiser (APDA) is commonly assigned administrative responsibilities. These duties include: -Downloading assignments -Planning routes -Creating and maintaining estimating profiles -Addressing customer concerns -Maintaining equipment -Download and Review Assignments – assignments are typically received electronically through the estimating system, but can come in other forms, including fax, email, and phone. In some cases, APDA daily routes may be pre-planned and customer appointments already made. However, in some situations it may be necessary to contact the customers to schedule appointments and plan the route for the day. It is important to review assignments for the next business day upon receipt to identify the location of each vehicle, the type of inspection, and any urgent assignments that may need to be treated as a priority. Next, plan your route for the day to maximize efficiency, taking any urgent assignments into consideration Creating and Maintaining Estimating Profiles -Estimating Systems and Profiles – estimating systems utilize profiles to store and manage information for insurance companies, insurance claim offices, and repair shops. Depending on company policy, areas of the system, such as insurance company and insurance claim office profiles, may not be accessible to an APDA. For example: if the APDA’s company manages an insurance company’s claim office profiles at a corporate level, the APDA will be able to create and edit shop profiles, but may not be able to edit the insurance company’s claim office profiles -What is a Shop Profile? – a shop profile allows an ADPA to load specific shop information into the estimating system that can be recalled when writing an estimate. This avoids the need to re-enter shop information each time that shop is used. Information housed in the shop profile includes: -Shop name -Address -Phone/fax numbers -Website/email address -Shop tax ID/business license -Shop labor and tax rates profile -Other shop-specific fields -What is an Insurance/Claims Office Profile? – an insurance/claim office profile is similar to a shop profile, but allows for creation of profiles for each insurance company and, if necessary, individual claim offices for each insurance company. insurance/claim office profiles typically include: -The insurance company name -The claim office ID -Address/contact information -A labor and tax rate profile -A part code table -Note: Part code tables typically include items found on collision repair estimates that may not be included in the estimating system databases. As with the shop profile, all profile information will be available in the estimate when the proper insurance/claim profile is selected Addressing Customer Concerns -Addressing Common Customer Complaints – an APDA will occasionally be called upon to assist with resolution of customer concerns. Typically, these concerns will be related to repair quality or to provide a second opinion on claim-related damages -Repair Quality – a vehicle owner may have a concern about color match, finish quality, or panel fit. In these situations, an APDA may be called upon to meet with the vehicle owner and/or repair shop to inspect the vehicle and determine appropriate actions necessary to resolve the customers concern -Related vs Unrelated Prior Damage – an APDA may also be called upon to assist with identifying claim-related vs unrelated damages. It can sometimes be difficult to differentiate between related and unrelated damages. When called upon for this type of inspection, it is important to inspect the vehicle and all damages very closely for clues that may help make this determination. For example: A vehicle that was involved in an accident 2 days ago would typically not show significant rust in the area of damage. It is possible, depending on climate conditions, for surface rust to form in 2 days since the accident, but significant amounts of rust would not be expected -Customer Concern Management – when handling customer complaints, the APDA must be equipped with the necessary skills to resolve the customers concern. Successful conflict resolution requires managing emotions, empathy, active listening, and assertiveness -Managing Emotions – when dealing with customer concerns, is it important to always remain calm and remember that customers with concerns may be emotional about the situation. These emotions are typically not consciously controlled and are often linked to past experiences and memories. While the customers complaint may be valid, the emotion displayed may not necessarily be related to the current situation, but rather to past experiences -Empathy – an APDA should use empathy when dealing with a customers complaint. Begin to understand the customers point of view, even if it differs. Remain professional and respectful -Active Listening – active listening is more than not interrupting a customer talking. Its paying close attention to what the other person is saying. While a customer is relaying a complaint or concern, use appropriate verbal and nonverbal communication, such as maintaining eye contact, nodding your head in understanding, and saying “yes”, “okay”, and “I understand”, at appropriate times. These elements ensure the customer feels heard, respected, and that you are interested in hearing what is said -Assertiveness – assertiveness is the ability to express and defend opinions and thoughts firmly and calmy. Being assertive is not becoming aggressive with the customer, nor is it passively accepting an idea or action that is known to be incorrect in an effort to keep the peace -Resolution and Documentation – it is important to ensure the customers concerns have been resolved and that all conversations and agreed actions to resolve the customers concerns are documented in the file notes. It is also important to recognize when the interaction is not going well and when the concern needs to be escalated to a manager for assistance -Fulfill Special Requests – occasionally, an APDA will receive requests for assistance with activities outside the scope of a standard damage appraisal -Picking Up Police/Accident Reports – picking up police or accident reports requires coordination with the responsible police department to confirm the report is ready, and then forwarding the report to the file handler at the insurance company. common information required when requesting a copy of a police/accident report includes the name(s) of the party involved and the date the accident occurred -Obtaining Accident Scene Information – an ADPA may be called upon to perform an accident scene investigation. This may require driving to the location of the accident, taking photos, preparing a diagram of the scene, and/or monitoring and recording traffic light timing and sequence. Photographs of the scene will typically need to show what the driver would have seen based on their direction of travel, along with photos from any other directions of traffic showing what the other drivers would have seen. If a diagram is requested, this will typically require taking measurements of the accident scene showing any tire tracks and documenting the distance at which the photos were taken from the intersection or landmarks. Monitoring and recording traffic light sequence may also be requested and will typically require documenting the sequence in which the traffic signals appear, from each direction, and the length of time each light is illuminated -Respond to Communications – an APDA may receive communication in the form of phone calls, emails, fax, voice mail, etc. regardless of the method of communication, all inquiries must be addressed in a timely fashion. An APDA must evaluate each inquiry to identify those that can be addressed using standard SOPs, those that may need to be treated as urgent or emergency situations, and those that will require escalation to a manager for assistance Maintaining Equipment -Maintaining Company Equipment – in some cases, an APDA may be required to conduct maintenance on company equipment. -Software Updates – while many of the systems are now cloud-based and update automatically, some estimating systems will require a software update. This may require a manual upgrade using a DVD provided by the data provider on a monthly or bi-monthly basis -Estimating Tools – estimating tools must be inspected to ensure proper operation. These tools include: -Cameras -Phones -Flashlights -Tread depth gauges -Measuring equipment Mirrors -Company Records – APDAs need to maintain logs based on company guidelines. Some of these logs include: -Vehicle mileage logs -Time logs -Payment logs Basic Brake System Overview -Basic Brake System Overview – a vehicle in motion has kinetic energy. A brake system applies friction at each wheel to slow down or stop vehicle motion. The friction turns kinetic energy into heat, which is absorbed and dissipated in the brake system parts. Service brake systems use hydraulic pressure to slow or stop wheel movement. Hydraulic fluid is used because it does not compress. Therefore, when pressure is exerted on the fluid, it is transmitted equally in all directions in the system, regardless of distance. A typical basic brake system is made up of all the following -Brake rotor -Brake drum -Brake caliper -Wheel cylinder -Master cylinder -Lines and hoses -Brake fluid -Brake fluid reservoir -Basic Brake System Operation – pressure is created in the brake system by applying pressure to the brake pedal. This creates hydraulic pressure in the master cylinder by forcing the piston against the fluid. The master cylinder creates hydraulic pressure in the brake lines. The brake lines carry hydraulic pressure to the wheel cylinders and calipers, which change hydraulic pressure into motion. The piston in the caliper or wheel cylinder moves outward as a result of the hydraulic pressure. This stops the vehicle by forcing the friction material against the rotor or drum. * Modern vehicles with anti-lock brakes will not use a proportioning valve. The distribution of brake pressure to each wheel will be controlled by the anti-lock brake system. -Basic Brake System Inspection – when inspecting the brake system for damage, be sure to inspect all brake system components including the brake rotors, drums, master cylinder, booster, hoses, lines, and parking brake system. It is important to inspect the braking system closely to identify collision-related damage vs. maintenance items. If brake system issues are identified that do not appear to be collision-related, these items must be fully documented and reviewed with the customer. If the customer elects not to have these required services performed, the final documents signed by the vehicle owner should include a summary of the necessary repairs and the customer’s decision to not complete the recommended repairs. * Leaking brake fluid indicates damage to the brake system. Trace the leak to its source to locate the damaged part. -Basic Brake System Inspection, cont’d – it is always important to include inspection of the brake pedal and fasteners as part of your brake system inspection. Some vehicles may be equipped with a safety feature that allows the brake pedal to drop away in a collision situation. This creates additional space and reduces potential impact to the driver’s legs. -Brake Warning Light – a warning light on the dash will likely illuminate if the hydraulic system has low fluid levels -Master Cylinder Description – parts of a master cylinder include: - The reservoir, which supplies the master cylinder with fluid. Some systems have a remote reservoir that uses a low-pressure supply line to supply fluid to the master cylinder. -The pushrod, which connects the brake pedal and power assist -Primary and secondary pistons, which force pressure into the brake lines -* As the piston is moved by the brake pedal pushrod, the brake fluid forward of the piston seals is forced into the brake lines, raising the pressure in the lines. Vehicles are built with multi-circuit braking systems. These systems have front and rear, or diagonally separated brake systems to ensure partial braking is retained in case of a brake line failure. -Collision Damage to Master Cylinders – collision damage to the master cylinder can be difficult to detect. When inspecting the master cylinder for damage, common types of damage may include -Broken lines -Detached reservoirs -Damaged housings -Dirt contamination -Damage to the body mounting locations or cowl panel -Brake Assist Systems – Vacuum and Hydraulic are two common automotive brake assist systems -Vacuum assist brakes have a vacuum assist that contains a diaphragm. Vacuum assist brakes apply vacuum to one side of the diaphragm and atmospheric pressure to the other. Vacuum is obtained from the engine intake manifold. They may require an additional vacuum pump to supply adequate vacuum on some engines -Hydraulic power, is typically done where engine vacuum is a concern, such as diesel engines, or vans where available space is a concern. Vehicles with an integral anti-lock brake system (ABS) use brake fluid under pressure to assist in the application of the brakes, Vacuum assist on the left. Hydraulic assist on the right -Collision Damage to Power Assists – collision damage to power assists include: -Hydraulic leaks -Vacuum leaks -Visible damage to the unit -Possible internal damage -* When repairing collision-damaged brake systems, assist units are usually not repaired, they are replaced when damaged. When installing a brake booster, be sure to refer to vehicle maker service procedures and requirements to ensure the pushrod is properly adjusted to avoid improper braking. -Damaged Power Assists – hard pedal can be described as excessive pressure required to stop a vehicle. Hard pedal can be caused by collision damage to power assists. While the engine is running, inspect the brake system for brake pedal feel. If the pedal feels too hard, it may indicate a booster that is not working or has a vacuum leak. Additional symptoms of damage to power assist units may include. -A hissing noise -Sensitive brakes -A slow releasing pedal -Pedal chatter -Incorrect engine idle (vacuum leak) -Disc Brake Assembly – key parts of a disc brake assembly include the: Caliper assembly and disc brake pads, Rotor and splash shield. -Caliper assembly – -the caliper assembly is attached to the spindle assembly and contains the -Caliper piston (s) -Caliper piston seal -Caliper piston dust boot -Bleeder screw -Hardware used with the caliper assembly includes the -Spring clip, which holds the inboard pad to the piston -Caliper bushings, which allow movement along the anchoring bolts -Anti-squeal shims -* Do not apply the brakes with the caliper or rotor removed -Disc Brake Pads -Brake pad replacement considerations include the amount of material remaining on the pad. Each vehicle maker will have recommendations indicating when brake material should be replaced. Depending on whether the friction material is riveted or bonded affects when the brake material is replaced. When inspecting brake material thickness, a part with riveted brake material will require replacement when more material is remaining as compared to bonded brake material. This is because the attaching rivets will contact the rotor before the pad will wear away. Check the condition of the brake lining. Look for signs of contamination, cracks, or deterioration. -Rotor and Splash Shield – -A rotor may -Be attached to the wheel spindle -Have vents for cooling -Be placed over the studs on the wheel hub -Be held in place by the road wheel or secured with screws to the hub assembly -A splash shield -Is bolted to the steering knuckle on the front brakes -Minimizes water, dirt, and dust from accumulating on the brake assembly -May be designed to direct air flow to help cool the brakes -Collision Damage to Disc Brakes – Collision damage to the caliper assembly may include bends, shifted slides, torn seals, or broken mounts. Damage to disc brake pads may include contamination, cracks, bends, or delamination. Damage to fasteners and other hardware may cause them to be bent or broken. Damage or wear to the caliper assembly can cause a number of problems. These include -Pulling during braking -Fluid leaks -A soft pedal -Dragging -Brake failure -Rotor Inspection – when inspecting brake rotors, check for -Bent mounting areas -Cracks and scoring -Glazing or corrosion -Improper thickness -* Inspect rotors for hardware and fasteners damage or warpage. Warpage of brake rotors is measured by lateral runout measurements. Runout can be identified by making measurements with dial indicators. * Improper tightening of the wheel fasteners can cause brake rotors to warp. -Brake Pads – when inspecting the brake system, the condition of the friction material should be checked. When parts must be replaced, the replacement alternatives must be carefully considered. -Inspecting Other Brake Hardware -Check other brake hardware for -Broken holding clips -Damaged, missing, or corroded attaching bolts -Dry caliper bushing -Check splash shield for -Bends or cracks -Excessive dirt and debris -* Check wheel mating surfaces for damage or debris – if unaddressed, vibrations and/or braking system issues may arise. -Replacement Part Options -When servicing brakes, it is important to use parts recommended by the vehicle maker. Using pads that are not recommended may cause a vehicle to brake differently than designed. Special pads with electronic wear sensors are required for vehicles that electronically monitor friction material wear. These pads use a wire in the friction material that creates an open in the circuit as the pads wear. When an open occurs, the driver is notified that it is time for replacement. -Drum Brake Assemblies – include the drum, backing plate, wheel cylinder, brake shoes, springs and hardware, and automatic mechanical (star wheel) adjuster. -Backing Plate – is bolted to the axle. This part is a fixture for attaching other brake parts -Brake Shoe Linings – are either riveted or bonded to a metal shoe. May contain asbestos. May contain metallic particles to increase stopping power. Have a stamped and reinforced steel backing for attaching other brake hardware. Are often designed to be mounted facing forward for the leading shoe or rearward for the trailing shoe. -Springs and Hardware – Types of springs and hardware used in a drum brake system include: -A shoe anchor pin, which is attached to the backing plate, and is used to transfer the braking torque from the shoes to the backing plate -Brake Drum – -Encloses the brake mechanical parts -Fits over the wheel studs -Is help in place by hub bearings, retaining screws, or a road wheel -May have fins for cooling -May be aluminum with a steel or iron friction surface insert -Mechanical (Star Wheel) Adjuster) – the star wheel adjuster has left-hands threads on one side of the vehicle and right-hand threads for the other side. Do not switch these adjusters from side to side or the rear brake will end up out of adjustment and the driver will experience a sinking pedal. -Return springs, used to bring the shoes back into position after braking and releasing hydraulic pressure. -Shoe hold-down springs, used to mount the shoes to the backing plate. These hold the shoes in place while still allowing some movement. -The parking brake actuator lever works with the parking brake cable to push the brake shoes against the brake drum when the parking brake is applied. -Collision Damage to Drum Brakes -Twisted, cracked, or out-of-round drums -Bent shoes -Contaminated or missing friction materials -Broken or stretched springs -Bent hardware -Leaking or cracked wheel cylinders -Damage to backing plates -Inspecting Drum Brakes – symptoms of worn or damaged drums include -A vibrating brake pedal, indicating a possible out of round condition -A low pedal where the adjuster is frozen due to corrosion or collision damage -Grabbing or overly sensitive brakes, indicating possible contaminated friction material -Abnormal noises -Pull or drag -The parking brake is not operating properly -* If there is suspected damage, remove the brake drum for inspection of all brake parts -Checking the Drum and Backing Plate – -Check the drum for -Cracks around the lug nut holes -Cracks in the friction surface -Black or blue discoloration that shows excessive heat -Scores or grooves in the surface -A wear pattern, which may indicate uneven shoe contact -* If a brake drum is cracked, it must be replaced. Minor scratches or grooves and minor discoloration or signs of overheating can be repaired by resurfacing. -Check the backing plate for -Bends in the plate -Proper parts attachment -A leaking wheel cylinder -A leaking axle seal -The condition of the hardware -Checking the Brake Linings and Wheel Cylinder -The brake linings should be checked for -Even lining wear pattern -Lining thickness -Broken or missing lining sections -Cracks in linings -Reversed (leading and trailing) linings -The wheel cylinder should be checked for -Proper contact with shoes -Leaks behind the seals -Checking the Springs and Hardware -Check the springs and hardware for -Damage -Stretched springs -Parts that are out of position -Check the adjusting mechanism for -Correct positioning -Proper movement -Excessively corroded threads -A binding adjustment lever -Check the parking brake lever for -Ease of movement -Correct positioning -An attached cable -Effectiveness -Parking Brakes – parking brakes apply brake pressure to the rear wheels using a foot-actuated floor pedal or hand lever. Brake pressure is typically applied using a mechanical cable attaching the pedal or lever to the rear brakes -Drum Parking Brakes – the drum parking brake is actuated by the parking brake lever or pedal, mechanically forcing both shoes outward against the brake drum. Return springs pull the shoes away from contacting the drum after the pedal or lever is released. -Electronic Parking Brakes – There are two basic designs for electronic parking brake systems. -The first design still uses cables to actuate the parking brakes. Cables from the wheels attach to a motor that pulls and releases similarly to the way a manual lever pulls and releases. -The second design uses actuators attached directly to the rear calipers. In this case, a signal controller will relay power to the motors to clamp the brake pads against the rotors. In most cases, this type of system will have a switch to activate the parking brake, but some systems activate the parking brake when the transmission is shifted into park. -* On some vehicles with caliper-mounted motors, the electronic parking brake can double as a hill-hold for vehicles with manual transmissions. -Drum-In-Hat Parking Brakes – drum-in-hat parking brakes have separate regular and parking brake systems. These parking brakes actuate the regular brakes hydraulically and the parking brake mechanically. Drum-in-hat parking brakes actuate the parking brake by mechanically operating a small drum brake just outside of the hub and inside the rotor. -Inspecting Parking Brakes – the parking brake pedal or lever and cables should be inspected for wear or damage. A parking brake that is worn or damaged often will not hold a vehicle stationary when parked on an incline. Cable adjustment may be required to determine if damage is present -when inspecting the parking brake pedal or lever, verify the parking brake -Engages easily -Holds the brake in place -Releases easily -Does not bind -Brake drag may also be a symptom of a faulty parking brake system. This can be caused by -Damaged or corroded brake parts -A bent, collapsed, or corroded parking brake cable -Bent or corroded parking brake pivots or brackets. -Brake Line Ends – the brake lines and hoses transmit fluid pressure from the master cylinder to the calipers or wheel cylinders. Brake line ends may be ISO flare fittings or double flare fittings, which are typically found on older model vehicles. Brake lines are made of double-wall steel and must be carefully formed and routed to avoid creating fluid restrictions. Brake hoses connect rigid brake lines to moveable parts, and they are flexible to allow movement with the wheel and suspension system. -Types of Brake Fluid – common brake fluid types include DOT 3, DOT 4, and DOT 5. * Do not allow brake fluid to come in contact with painted surfaces. If this happens, wash the area thoroughly with water. -DOT 3 Brake Fluid – DOT 3 brake fluid is non-petroleum based, but has additives that aid internal system lubrication and prevent corrosion. It maintains its viscosity in high temperatures. DOT 3 brake fluid should not be stored after a container is opened and is designed to absorb moisture. Moisture in a braking system can vaporize, creating air in the system and lowering the brake fluid boiling point. This process can cause corrosion on brake system parts. -DOT 4 Brake Fluid – has a higher boiling point than DOT 3. Can be mixed with DOT 3. Absorbs more moisture than DOT 3. -DOT 5 Brake Fluid – is silicone-based. Does not absorb moisture. Compresses more than DOT 3 or DOT 5. Is not compatible with DOT 3 or DOT – do not mix. Is used and recommended by only a few vehicle makers. Is purple in color. Basic Electronics for Estimators (1/2) Electrical Systems and Basic Circuit Flow Understanding the System -Communication – estimators and Auto Physical Damage Appraiser (ADPAs) should have a basic understanding of electrical circuits and automotive electrical systems to communicate issues with the vehicle owner and the repair facility technician. This understanding will also aid in the ability to make an accurate assessment of damage and communicate electrical diagnostic and repair concerns. Estimators and ADPAs are not responsible for performing electronic diagnostics, testing, or repairs; however, a basic understanding of how common electrical repair processes are completed is beneficial -I-CAR Troubleshooting Flowchart – the I-CAR Troubleshooting Flowchart lists the five steps to solving an electrical problem. Although damage analysis will not require an in-depth knowledge of these steps, it is helpful to know the systematic method of troubleshooting. The I-CAR Troubleshooting steps are: -1) Define the problem -2) Know the system -3) Find the cause -4) Make the repair -5) Check the system -Note: Typically, this flowchart is not used for damage analysis purposes; however, it is important to consider these throughout this course -Defining the Problem – finding an electrical problem can be a challenge, as circuits run behind and under trim panels. To complete this task, an estimator should use the collision advantage, as well as other visual cues, to define the problem. One of the major estimators run across is the lack of power to the system. This may be either a dead or a low battery. Without a proper charge, its very difficult to do any damage analysis to electrical systems if the proper power is not available. -Use the Collision Advantage – an extremely valuable strategy for finding electrical problems is the collision advantage. Since automotive electrical systems are expansive, locating the source of an electrical issue for a vehicle that has not sustained any damage can be a timely and difficult task. After a collision, a logical starting point for locating the source of an electrical problem is in the area of the collision. This is the collision advantage. If a vehicle is brought into a mechanical repair facility with an electrical problem, the entire vehicle may still need to be diagnosed -Test Electrical Functionality – if the battery has enough charge, test all of the electrical loads by: -1) Turning the headlights on and off -2) Operating the horn -3) Turning on the radio -4) Switching the cooling fan and the heater to all the settings -5) Operating all the switches in the doors -6) Turning on and off interior accessory lamps -7) Operating all of the power accessories -Note: Note any lit warning lamps on the instrument panel, which electrical loads work properly, and which ones do not. Loads that do not work may have circuit commonalities -Rule Out a Dead Battery – if no electrical parts are working as designed, the battery may be the source of the issue. If the battery has a low charge, or there is wiring damage that stops the electrical flow, none of the lights or power accessories will operate. It is also likely that the odometer will not be readable. A partially discharged battery may be recharged with an appropriate battery charger, however, it is important to know the safety precautions when doing this. Note: Jump packs do not recharge a battery that is dead or low -Inspect Battery Safety Terminals – some vehicle makers have a safety device installed in the positive battery cable of some vehicles. This battery safety terminal (BST) is a self-contained explosive-type device that deploys during a collision; usually when the front airbags deploy. BST deployment creates an open in the positive cable connection, which stops the flow of power on the primary starter cable, reducing the risk of fire. Power is still maintained to some circuits. Note: The entire cable or a section of the cable requires replacement following the BST activation -Identify Spilled Battery Acid – a visual inspection under hood may reveal spilled battery/sulfuric acid. This acid will burn away wiring insulation and connector housings, leaving wires exposed. It will also corrode any part that it comes in contact with. Due to the fact that, in its liquid form, battery acid may travel, specific time, attention, and considerations to neutralize and clean up a battery acid spill must be accounted for in the estimate. Corrosion protection should be restored to any affected areas -Electrical vs Electronic Systems – an electrical system refers to the load, path, power source, etc. that make up the electrical circuit. This would include wires, connectors, switches, resistors, power, and ground. An electronic system includes a control module, all of the parts it controls (loads), and parts that gather information for the control module (inputs and sensors), connected together. For example, the electronic stability control system (ECS) consists of the ESC module, wheel speed sensors, yaw rate sensor, steering wheel angle sensor, and the anti-lock braking system (ABS) module -Know the System – knowing the system, which is the second step in the troubleshooting flowchart, may require in-depth service information. Even a very simple circuit, such as a horn, could have some complicated subsystems, like an alarm system routed in with the horn circuit. -Wiring Diagram – a wiring diagram is essentially a road map of how the parts are connected together. Although a wiring diagram helps in understanding a circuit, the diagram only shows what makes up the circuit path. It does not show the size of the parts, the lengths of the wires, or the location of the circuit in the vehicle -Part Locator Diagram – part locator diagrams may be available on the service website. These are line art or photos of where the parts of the circuit are located. Part locator diagrams are helpful after a collision, as it is an opportunity to use the collision advantage. Paired with the diagram, you can identify parts or wiring that are located near the site of the collision, and use that information to identify the source of the electrical problem -Power and Ground Distribution Diagram – the power and ground distribution diagrams show the power source and the circuits that share common goods. Knowing which circuits share common power feeds and common grounds will dictate what other loads to check. For example, if the horn, dome light, and accessory power outlet are all powered by one fuse and the horn does not work, check to see if the dome light and the accessory outlet work. If none of these are working, perhaps the fuse is blown. If these three share one ground location and none of these parts are working, the ground may be the issue. Check the area of the collision to see if the ground cable is there, and if it has been damaged -Diagnostic Flowchart – troubleshooting a complex, computer-controlled system generally requires the technician to follow a diagnostic flowchart from the vehicle maker service information. Flowcharts contain steps directing the technician to perform specific tasks, such as making electrical measurements. If Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTCs) are present, service information will likely have a corresponding flowchart. If no DTCs are present, then symptom charts may be available to help diagnose the problem -Technical Service Bulletin – Technical Service Bulletins (TSBs) are issued by a vehicle maker when there are several occurrences of an unanticipated problem. TSBs are deemed valuable, as many times the subject of a TSB will be a common electrical problem with a particular make or model. The TSB may include a short explanation of how to correct the problem. Diagnostic flowcharts and TSBs do not take into account the fact that the vehicle was just involved in a collision. Before turning to a diagnostic flowchart, the collision technician should use the collision advantage to inspect the damaged area for pinched or broken wires, loose grounds, and possible shorts. In the end, no matter how complicated the circuit, the problem is usually an open, short, or a bad ground Understanding the Basic Circuit Flow -Basic Parts of a Circuit – electrical parts are connected into a continuous path of wiring, which could stretch the entire length of the vehicle. The three necessary parts for a circuit to be a complete working circuit are the power source, the load, and the path. Without one of those three, there is no circuit. -Power Source – a vehicles battery is the power source and the power storage device. When the vehicle is running, the alternator becomes the power source and the recharging battery becomes a load. Electronic systems rely on a good power source to operate correctly -Load – an electrical load is an electrical part or portion of a circuit that consumes the active electric power ad does the work. Examples of loads include: -Bulbs -Motors -Solenoids -Path – circuit paths are the wires, terminals, and connectors bundled into wiring harnesses. Conductors carry electrical current through the circuit. Although all metals are conductors, copper is the most commonly used metal for conductors, wiring, and terminal ends. Other conductor metals include aluminum, silver, and gold. Connectors have a plastic housing with metal contacts inside -A Complete Circuit -a circuit path must be complete. If there is a break or open anywhere in the path, the flow stops, and the load will not work. If there is a restriction or unwanted resistance in the path, such as a pinched or partially broken wire, the load may partially work or may not work at all -Circuit Protectors and Controls – in addition to the necessary power source, load, and path, there are other parts in most circuits -Circuit Protectors – every circuit on a vehicle has at least one protection device to safeguard from overloads. An overload can result in damage to other system parts or can even result in a fire. Circuit protector devices include: -Circuit breakers -Fuses -Fusible links -Switch (Circuit Control) – every circuit has a circuit control. A control can be a simple push switch that opens and closes a lamp circuit to turn on and off the lamp. Most switches on modern vehicles are an input to the computer that processes the user request and manages the operation of the load. Switches usually have two or more sets of contacts. Opening these contacts opens the circuit. Closing these contacts completes the circuit. Common problems with a switch after a collision can be identified using the collision advantage. These include cracked casings, loose internal contacts, and loose or damaged connections. In most of these cases, the switch should be replaced -Circuit Protector Locations – fuses and other circuit protectors may be located in fuse blocks, or in multiple areas under hood. The inside cover of the fuse block usually labels the location, rating, and use of each circuit protector contained in the block. Common locations for fuse blocks include under the instrument panel, behind kick panels, and under the rear seat. Larger circuit protectors, called maxi-fuses, fusible links, and fuse elements, are designed to carry larger amounts of flow than fuses. They are used in high-powered circuits, such as the main battery feed, and may be grouped together near the battery. Note: Refer to manufacturer vehicle service information for exact location of the circuit protectors -Hot and Ground Sides of a Circuit – there are two sides to every circuit, the hot side and the ground side. The hot side of a circuit is from the power source up to one side of the load. The ground side of a circuit is from the other side of the load to ground. Electronic systems may use computer outputs to open or close the circuit path to the load. This is commonly done on the ground side of the circuit, but can also be done on the hot side of the circuit -Ground – ground is the common meeting place for electrical flow to the battery. Because all circuits are not physically wired to the negative battery post, common ground is needed. To create a common ground, the negative terminal of the battery may be connected to the vehicles frame, metal body, or engine block. For example, methods of connecting to ground include: -Multiple circuits connected to a single bolt, which are attached to the frame or body -Bolting the metal case of a part to the frame or body, called a case ground -Attaching a ground strap from the part to the frame or body -Note: One of the more frequent problems with post collision electrical circuits is a bad ground connection, making the circuit incomplete -Opens – an open is a break in the circuit stopping current flow. In a collision situation this could be a cut wire, damaged connector, or some other damaged part -Shorts – a short occurs when the current flow takes a different path than intended. Current flow will always take the easiest path, and will also seek every available path. A short is often caused by insulation scraped off a wire, allowing the wire to touch another bare wire or ground. The exposed wires may touch only from vehicle movement or engine vibration, causing intermittent circuit operation such as the flickering of a bulb or sounding of a chime. -Short to Power – if two wires are shorted together, and they power different circuits, the loads may operate when the circuit is turned on or they may not work when intended or as designed. The circuit protection device may blow due to a current overload. The wipers moving when the headlamps are switched on is an example of a short to power -Short to Ground – a short to ground will cause different problems depending on where the short occurs. If the circuit is grounded before the load, the load will be taken out of the circuit and the fuse will likely blow. A short to ground after the load may show no problem at all, but since the circuit is wired incorrectly, there may be additional problems in another circuit that will be difficult to find. If the circuit is ground side switched, a short to ground between the load and the switch would cause the load to stay on -Electricity and Magnetism – whenever current is flowing through a circuit, an electromagnetic field is present around the path. This field only exists when current is flowing. The higher the current flow there is, the larger electromagnetic field. Some of the electrical parts that use electromagnetic fields to work include solenoids, relays, motors, and magnetic pickups -Solenoids – a solenoid is a type of electromagnet that generates a controlled magnetic field. This cylindrical coil of wiring acts as a magnet when carrying an electric current. Solenoids are used to perform several functions on a vehicle. These functions include remotely opening a fuel filler door or deck lid, opening some door locks, opening and closing a valve that controls fuel delivery, called a fuel injector solenoid, and controlling brake fluid system pressure on an anti-lock braking system. Note: Solenoids can be physically damaged in a collision. If damaged, replacement is the only option. If a solenoid does not appear damaged, the solenoid should be tested for proper operation -Relays – a relay is a type of switch that is opened or closed using an electromagnet. A relay uses a low current circuit to control a high current circuit. It can also provide electrical isolation of the control circuit. Using a relay eliminates the need to run heavy wires into the passenger compartment or through a computer module. Relays may be located alone or in blocks, just like fuses, and are often grouped together with fuses in the same block. Relays are commonly computer controlled -Unwanted Magnetic Fields – an electromagnetic field around any wire or cable when current is flowing can cause problems when the electromagnetic field is not wanted. A starter circuit, for example, has a high amount of current flowing when the vehicle is being started. If those high current wires are routed wrong, the surrounding electromagnetic field can interfere with other circuits, possibly causing damage. This can lead to intermittent problems or, in the case of a control module, even permanent part failure. -Twisted/Shield Wires – some circuits or parts that cannot tolerate any unwanted electromagnetic fields have twisted wiring harnesses and shields on the wires to reduce the effects of the magnetic fields. These shielded wires are common on anti-lock braking system wheel speed sensors and other sensitive electronic circuit wiring, such as computer network communication busses. Twisted and shielded wires may be repairable depending on the location, application, and vehicle maker recommendations -5-Volt Systems – computers are extremely sensitive to electromagnetic fields, and can be damaged by a poorly routed cable. Computer-controlled circuits operate on lower voltage and current levels, making them more susceptible to interference. While most electrical circuits typically operate at 12 volts, electronic circuits typically operate at 5 volts. A soldering fun, even static electricity, can also damage or destroy control modules -Fiber-Optic Cables – information may travel through fiber-optic cables on some systems. Fiber-optic cables transmit signals using light instead of current through a wire. A fiber-optic cable may appear the same as any other wire, and may be bundled with other wires in a wiring harness. When looking at the connector or cable end, there will be a hole in the connector body of fiber optic cable, instead of a terminal cavity. The end of the cable will also be hollow, so light can pass through. Note: If a fiber-optic cable is damaged, the only repair is replacement of the cable between connectors. Special tools are required Basic Electronics for Estimators (2/2) Circuit Operation and Repair Checking Operation of a Circuit -Voltage, Current, and Resistance – when a technician checks the operation of a faulty circuit, more than just a visual inspection may be required. Troubleshooting the circuit may require measuring circuit valves, which are voltage, current and resistance. -Voltage – voltage is the electrical pressure that moves electrons through a circuit. Voltage is measured in volts, often shown abbreviated with a capital V. A fully charged conventional storage battery on a vehicle measures between 12.4 V and 12.6 V -Current – the electron current is measured in amperage as a number of amperes or amps. Amp is often shown abbreviated with a capital A. Direct Current (DC) is current that flows in one direction only. Alternating Current (AC) is current that flows both ways. Current from a household electrical outlet is AC. Automotive circuits are mostly DC, because batteries store only DC. An alternator produces AC, but it is changed to DC in order to charge the battery and power the vehicle circuits -Resistance – resistance opposes the current flow, and is measured in a number of ohms. Ohms are often shown as the Greek letter omega. The load is the main resistance in the circuit. By consuming most of the supplied voltage to operate, the load is resisting the flow of current. A wire connected directly between the hot and the ground battery post would not make up a proper circuit. Though there is some resistance in the length of the wire and the connectors, it is not enough. The wire would quickly burn, due to too much current flow. If the wire is large enough, the battery would quickly discharge and be unusable. A more substantial resistance, the load, is required -Types of Circuits – the two types of circuits are the parallel circuit and the series circuit, named for the flow of current within the circuit. -Parallel Circuit – automotive circuits are mostly wired in a parallel circuit where, even though there may be several loads branching off one wiring harness, each circuit brand has its own complete path. Each brand has access to full source voltage. In a parallel circuit, if there is a cut wire or an open in one of the branches, only the load in that branch if affected -Series Circuit – wiring a circuit in series, where there is only one path for more than one load, requires each load to share the available voltage. All of the bulbs in the circuit shown are 12-volt bulbs are sharing one 12-volt source, which causes the bulbs to appear dim compared to the parallel circuit. One open in a series circuit will stop the circuit from working. For example, on some Christmas lights, if one bulb burns out, the entire strand of lights will not work -Test Equipment – special tools are needed to test the operation and faults of a vehicles electrical system, as well as to measure voltage across a circuit -Digital Volt-Ohm Meter – the DVOM is one of the most commonly used test tools and is used to measure voltage, resistance, and current. An Amp probe allows for current measurement without breaking into the circuit -Scan Tools – a scan tool is needed to read DTCs, which may lead to specific testing that requires the use of a DVOM or other OEM-specific test equipment. Some scan tools have built-in scope and meter capabilities -Test Harness Probes – special test harness probes and back probe connector kits should be used to avoid harness and connector terminal damage, which may cause intermittent problems. OEMs may have other special test harnesses and breakout boxes for advanced testing requirements -Measuring Voltage – measuring voltage is the most common measurement taken in a circuit. Even though voltage remains consistent at the source, voltage can be measured anywhere in the circuit and is designed to be mostly used, or ‘dropped’, across the load. If a voltage measurement shows that nearly full voltage is not dropped across the load, there is likely trouble somewhere in the circuit. A voltage measurement can be taken anywhere in a live circuit -Measuring Across any Points – to measure voltage, the circuit must be powered, or turned on. After selecting the proper scale on the DVOM, the two leads are positioned across any two points in the circuit. The measurement on the meter is the number of volts between those two points. Note: When measuring voltage the DVOM does not affect, or is invisible to, the circuit being measured -Measuring across a Battery – battery voltage is critical to the operation of the vehicles electronic systems; this should be verified at the battery terminals, and possibly, at remove access locations. This checks the sate of charge of the battery, and shows the full available voltage, also called full source voltage. If the measurement is: -12.66 volts, the state of charge is 100% -12.45 volts, the state of charge is 75% -12.24 volts, the state of charge is 50% -12.06 volts, the state of charge is 25% -11.89 volts, the state of charge is 0% -Note: Removing the surface change from a battery provides a more accurate reading. To do this, turn on a load, such as the headlamps, for a short time with the ignition on the OFF position -Measuring across an Open – this measurement shows full source voltage across an open ground. The DVOM will always show full source voltage across an open no matter where it occurs in the hot or ground side of the circuit. When there is an open in the circuit, voltage does not get used by the load. On a vehicle, this is one way of detecting an open in a circuit. Note that the rest of the circuit must be complete with power applied -Voltage Drops – a voltage measurement taken anywhere in a live circuit can be revealing. For example, the 11-volt measurement across the headlamp means a dim bulb and a problem somewhere else in the circuit. A voltage drop measurement of about 2 volts across a connector would reveal a problem with the connector. It could be corrosion on the connector contacts or perhaps a loose terminal -Voltage Drop Reveal – a voltage drop test may also reveal a few wire strands broken inside a wire sheathing, hidden corrosion under a bolt, and hidden corrosion on a switch. Any one of these problems could cause a dim or flickering bulb, a slow running motor, or the load not working at all. It should also be pointed out that if these same areas were checked for resistance with the DVOM set to ohms, the measurement may show zero ohms, or no resistance problem at all -Voltage on Hybrid Electric and Pure-Electric Vehicles – on hybrid-electric and pure-electric vehicles, the high-voltage battery may be as much as 300 volts, or higher. The voltage and current available is high enough to kill. Always approach a damaged electric and hybrid electric vehicle assuming that the high-voltage system is energized. These vehicles are usually equipped with a 12-volt battery providing power to the vehicle computers and accessories and may allow some systems and accessories to be checked for proper operation. Before looking under the hood or in other areas of the vehicle, ensure the vehicle is powered down and secured to prevent unwanted movement. Turning the ignition OFF does not disable the high-voltage system. Follow the vehicle makers procedures to disable the high-voltage system -Resistance Measurements – to measure resistance, the circuit part has to be isolated, and no power can be applied, which is why resistance measurements are uncommon when looking for circuit problems. For example, if two sides of a wire connector are measured for resistance with the connector wired into the circuit, the meter will show the resistance of the entire circuit. Even if a part is isolated, a resistance measurement provides little information since the resistance may be correct, or the part may be damaged. A step in a diagnostic flowchart may say to measure resistance across two points, or across a part such as an impact sensor. This specific measurement is used in the flowchart to determine how to proceed. Other than a specific direction like that, it is not very common to take a resistance measurement -Continuity Check – a resistance measurement can be used to check for continuous path in the circuit – one with no breaks or opens. This is called a continuity check and can be done on individual wires within a wiring harness. Very low resistance (less than a few ohms) indicates that the two points are connected electrically. If the resistance is more than a few ohms, there may be unwanted resistance in the path. If the meter indicates OL, the circuit has no electrical connection, which means the circuit is open. A voltage drop test may also be used to check for continuity in a circuit. Zero or near zero voltage drop is continuity. A continuity test is important when troubleshooting a wiring harness or parts that have been involved in a collision, which may develop circuit opens or shorts Connector and Wire Repair -Wiring Issues – wiring issues are usually at the forefront of collision damage. Wires are pinched or cut, including wiring harnesses. This means that several wires are cut in one location. Wiring harnesses are several sizes, and it is often more practical to replace a small, isolated wiring harness. If a wiring harness is damaged, the decision to repair or replace is based on several factors, with the vehicle makers service information having the final decision. There will be general statements on wire repair recommendations, usually found in the mechanical/electrical service information or in TSBs -Offset Splice Locations – some vehicle makers may allow multiple splices to offset specific distances to avoid a bulk of repairs in one location; this may limit the number of splices. If there is not enough room to complete the splices, the harness may require replacement. Wire repairs should not be performed in an area that will continually flex, such as a doorjamb. This would be prone to failure. If replacing a portion of a wire, it is important to match the wire thickness, or gauge. Splicing in a different gauge wire affects the resistance of the wiring, affecting the current flow, and therefore changing the circuit design -Wire Repair kits – most vehicle makers offer wire repair kits, which contain the tools and materials required for wiring repair. The kit may contain splice sleeves or heat-shrink tubing, which is melted over the soldered splice. Verify that wire repair is permitted in service information. Some vehicle makers will not honor warranties on their vehicles if their wire repair kits are not used. Note: Some vehicle makers do not allow wires to be repaired -Connectors – connectors are used to join wires together. There are several types of connectors, each designed for certain usage. Examples include high density connectors, and waterproof connectors. If a bad connector is suspected, first perform a visual check looking for: -Damage -A missing seal -Corrosion -Discoloration -Cracks -Swelling -Note: If the connection doesn’t appear damaged on the outside, but damage is suspected, separate the mating connectors for closer inspection Basic Estimate Writing (1/4) Damage Report Overview Function of a Damage Report -Damage Report Estimate – repair estimates, which may also be referred to as Damage Report, Damage Appraisal, or Visible Damage Quote are typically computer-generated but can also be manually written. The damage report has many functions, including keeping a record of the estimated repair costs and describing the work that will be done when repairing the vehicle. Having a written record of this information will help to prevent misunderstandings between the repairer and customer or insurer as to what will be done during the repair process. The damage report may be considered an agreement between the three parties as to how the vehicle will be repaired Types of Damage Reports -Estimating Systems – computer-generated estimates are typically written using point-and-click entry instead of manual insertion of part prices and labor units. Parts are chosen from drop-down lists or on-screen diagrams, and the prices and labor units for their replacement are automatically entered. Keyboarding in entries is typically only required for customer, vehicle, and insurer information, and also for notes and entries for uncommon procedures or overrides. Computer-generated damage reports also have the capability of being submitted to the insurer online, along with digital images of the vehicle and the damage. This may help to speed up the approval process, reducing cycle time for the repair Other Features – other features of the damage report include the ability to store claim-related documentation. Notes on discussions with the vehicle owner or insurer can be included, as well as documentation of any changes made to the estimate during the repair process -Event Logs – most estimating systems also track the estimating process with some form of an event log. This log typically tracks things like file creation date, estimate date, date estimate locked, supplements, etc. if the estimate is written for an insurance partner direct repair program (DRP, it will also track items like assignment date and upload dates -Repair Authorization – some estimating systems may also provide optional tools, such as a repair authorization that can be printed as part of the estimate for the customer to sign, authorizing repairs. This may be a separate document in some repair shops. In some cases, the final repair estimate may also serve as the repair invoice as well -Parts Code Table or Prestore – the estimating systems may also offer a tool, often referred to as a parts code table or prestore, that allows you to set up common items that are required on repair estimates, but not included in the estimating database. These tables will typically include things like hazardous waste, stripes, detailing, cover car, NVH foam, corrosion protection, and chip-resistant coatings, to name a few Customer and Vehicle Information -Administration Information – the damage report contains basic identifying information for the repair facility, customer, insurance company, and the vehicle, as well as information regarding the damage and costs -Shop Information – the estimate will include shop information, such as: shop name, address, phone number, and estimator name and contact information. Some shops also include their fax number and tax ID number. It is important to review this information with each customer to ensure they have all the necessary information to contact you should they have any questions or additional requests -Customer Information – when preparing an estimate it is important to capture the name, address, phone number, and e-mail address. It is also important to confirm your customers preferred method of contact for status updates and any communications related to the repair facility of their vehicle. -Vehicle Information – while inspecting the vehicle it is important to obtain the necessary information such as: vehicle identification number (VIN), model year, make and model, trim packages, vehicle options, mileage, production date, engine/transmission type, license number, paint code, and trim code. All of this information could be necessary to ensure the correct parts are ordered for the repairs -Insurance Company Information – a damage report should contain identifying information and contact information about the insurance company involved in the claim. This includes the insurance company name, claim number assigned to the loss, and the date that the loss or collision occurred. In addition, the report should list the name and contact information of the person handling the claim, if known. You will need this information for any communication with the insurance company Basic Estimate Writing (2/4) Items on the Estimate -Operation Types – when preparing an estimate there are several common labor operations you will need to be familiar with and understand -Overhaul (O/H) – overhaul refers to the multiple operations commonly done to an assembly or part. For example, when replacing a bumper cover and reinforcement, the estimating database may provide overhaul time, which includes: removing an assembly from the vehicle, disassembly of the assembly, cleaning and inspecting the various parts of the assembly, repairing or replacing damaged parts, reassembling the parts of the assembly, and installing and aligning the assembly back to the vehicle. Note: Labor required to repair damaged pieces of an assembly is not included in overhaul time -Remove and Replace (R/R) – remove and replace (R/R) is required when a panel or part is removed and replaced with a new or equivalent part. Operations typically covered in R&amp;R include: removing the damaged part from the vehicle; transferring any necessary parts from the damaged parts to a new part (an example of this would be transferring the movable glass, glass regulator, latch and outside handle when replacing a door shell assembly); installing a new part on the vehicle or an assembly; and aligning the part on the vehicle or assembly -Remove and Install (R&amp;I) – remove and install (R&amp;I) may be done on an undamaged part to allow access to a damaged part in need of repair or replacement. This could also be done to facilitate the refinish process. The undamaged part or assembly is then set aside with no further disassembly done. Operations that may be covered in the R&amp;I procedure include: removal of a part or assembly, installing the part or assembly back on the vehicle or part that it was attached to, and aligning the part or assembly for proper fit -Disconnect and Reconnect (D&amp;R) – another additional labor operation that may be seen on some damage reports is “disconnect and reconnect’ or D&amp;R. D&amp;R includes disconnecting, unplugging, or unbolting a part at the connection point, but not removing it from the vehicle. When the necessary repairs are completed, the part is reconnected, plugged back in, or removed fasteners are installed -Drill Time – drill time is the labor time that may or may not be included in the labor time supplied by the information provider. This time may be for drilling out spot welds, or for drilling holes in a new panel for the purposes of plug welding as part of the installation process. To determine if drill time is part of the included operations or not included operations, please refer to the data provider procedure pages -Repair – repair labor listed on an estimate refers to a damaged part written for repair vs. replacement. The labor times attached to these items are a judgement decision made by the individual preparing the estimate based on damage visible at the time the estimate was written -Included Operation – included operations are labor operations the information provider has taken into consideration when developing the database (Book) time for another larger operation. For example, removal of moldings and emblems attached to a grill, when written by themselves would be an individual operation, but the information provider would likely consider them included operations when replacing the grille. Be sure to reference the estimating system Procedure Pages (P-Pages) to determine specifically what operations are included or not included -Sublet – items listed on the estimate as sublet are typically repairs the shop is not equipped to handle or the shop does not have expertise to handle in-house -Labor Categories – when preparing an estimate there are also several labor categories available for selection that you will need to know and understand. The decision on which category to select is based on the skilled labor required to complete each particular operation. In some cases, the data provider may identify a part as a mechanical or structural part, but this alone does not determine the labor category on the estimate. -Body – this category will usually encompass labor related to parts and assemblies classified as ‘Body’ parts or operations that will be completed by a body technician. This is typically the default labor category and will not have any special identification on the estimate -Paint – this category will include all operations related to the vehicle refinish process, or operations that will be performed by a refinish or prep technician. Some estimates may have separate repair operations listed for ‘Refinish’ and others may not have the ‘Refinish’ operation listed, but will show refinish labor in a separate column on the estimate -Mechanical – this category includes operations that will be performed by a technician with a mechanical skill set. In some cases, the information provider may identify the part as a mechanical component, but that alone may not cause the operation to appear in the mechanical labor category on the estimate. In the example shown, the lower case ‘m’ on the left side of the labor time is the information provider -Frame/Structural – items typically included in the frame/structural category include items identified as structural components, activities performed by a frame or structural technician, and/or will involve the use of specialized frame repair equipment. In some cases, the information provider may identify structural components, but that alone may not cause the operation to appear in the frame or structural category. In the example shown, the information provider lists the labor category frame (FR) but other information providers may identify structural components with an “S” -Diagnostic – this category is typically used to identify the labor required to perform additional inspection and/or troubleshooting necessary to identify the cause of a problem. This will then allow for the appropriate repair or replace items to be added to the estimate of repairs after the source of the problem has been identified -Electrical – this labor category will typically include items classified as electrical parts and/or electrical system repairs -Glass – items found in this category will typically include stationary glass repairs and/or replacement performed in-house and not sublet to an outside vendor -Overlap – overlap is a deduction taken to account for duplicate actions, such as when adjacent panels are worked on. The estimating P-Pages can be utilized to identify included and not included operations that are applied to labor times within their estimating database. Most computerized systems will automatically calculate the overlap deduction, but may not display them on the estimate. Some systems may provide a breakdown of the labor on a separate report, such as a labor report -Body – when replacing two adjacent panels, there may be some redundant operations between each panel that may result in an overlap deduction. For example: -Some surfaces are common to both the quarter panel and the rear body panel -Removal of both panels includes some common operations, such as spot weld and seam sealer removal where the two panels are joined -Refinish – refinish overlap applies when two or more panels are refinished at the same time. This occurs because there are some operations included in base color refinish allowances that are not necessary to duplicate an additional panels being refinished. Although the estimating system database will typically make these adjustments for you, it is important to understand the formula used by your estimating system -Manual Entry Items – manual entry items are entries made by the person preparing the damage repair estimate. These entries can be manual overrides, manual line entries, or estimate/line notes -System Override and Manual Line Entry – a system override is any chance the user makes to information supplied by the estimating database. These changes will typically include labor times or part prices. A manual line entry is an entry made by the person preparing the estimate for a unique item that is not identified in the estimating database or user defined parts code table. These entries may be designated by an asterisk (*) or a pound sign (#) and/or the entry may be underlined -Line Notes – line notes are used on estimates to provide explanations for any deviations in the repair plan; expectations limiting certain repairs; prior damage descriptions; any repair requests made by the customer; explanations for why automatic entries have been modified; or for providing parts vendor information when alternative parts are utilized. For example, if a manufacturer provides a sectioning procedure for replacing a quarter panel, but the information provider only lists a full uniside replacement in the database, the estimator may elect to manually override the labor time to reflect the sectioning operation. In this case, the estimator should enter an estimate/line note explaining the change so everyone involved is clear about how the repairs are to be completed and the reason for overriding the database-provided labor time -Part Types – often, there are several options when selecting replacement parts for completing repairs. The decision about which part type is selected may depend on several different factors, such as owner preference, insurance company guidelines, availability, and economics. Estimating systems will typically provide several part types to choose from when preparing an estimate -OEM – OEM parts are replacement parts manufactured by the original equipment manufacturer (OEM). These parts typically do not have a special designation on the repair estimate -Aftermarket – aftermarket parts are replacement parts manufactured by a vendor other than the OEM -Reconditioned – reconditioned parts are parts that have been repaired or reconditioned and now are being sold as repair parts -LKQ/Used – Like, Kind, and Quality (LKQ), or used parts removed from another damaged vehicle and resold as repair parts -Optional OEM – optional OEM are parts manufactured by the OEM, but not sold to the shop directly. These parts are typically run off or blemished parts, and not all makers offer these parts for purchase -Book Time – book time, also called flat rate or database time, refers to the labor units that are estimated to perform a procedure. Flat rate units for replacing parts of a vehicle are listed in the estimating database or crash guide and are based on the use of new undamaged parts on a new undamaged vehicle. They are considered to be stand-alone operations. If the labor units for replacing a part include the removal of another part or parts, this will be listed in the labor notes or procedure pages (P-Pages) related to the replacement of the part being replaced Basic Estimate Writing (3/4) Refinish Operations -Types of Finish – when preparing an estimate you will need to be able to identify the type of finish you are working with. Common types of finishes found on modern vehicles include single-stage, basecoat/clearcoat, and multi-stage finishes. Basecoat/clearcoat finishes are the most common OEM finishes used. Multi-stage finishes have a basecoat, tinted translucent mid-coats, and a clearcoat -Paint Code Finish Type – in most cases, your estimating system will assume a two-stage finish; but it is always necessary to confirm the finish type when preparing a damage estimate. Identifying finish type starts with determining the paint code and then making the necessary adjustments within the estimating system to ensure the estimating database will make those necessary adjustments to the way refinish times are calculated. The type of finish on the vehicle may also play a role in determining additional refinish operations required. Be aware that color matching and how current paint conditions like chips and scratches may affect the refinish process -Color Blending and Trim Removal – color blending may be a necessary addition to many damage estimates. Color blending helps to disguise slight differences in color, and reduces any visible color difference between the original finish color and the refinish color. It will not, however, hide a severe color mismatch. Panels that are going to be refinished or blended may require removal of trim that sits against the paint finish. In addition, when considering panel blending, remember that while the color coat can be blended the clearcoat should be applied edge to edge of the panel to ensure proper coverage and UV protection -Refinish Time – the base refinish allowance from an estimating system is typically based on a single color applied to a new, undamaged panel. This may only include outside surfaces, unless otherwise stated in the document. For example, an underside color may be different than the body color and not included in the refinish time. Base refinish times typically do not include operations such as tint matching, edging, or the inside/underside of a panel. Although tinting and other operations are not always required, they may be necessary in some situations such as special colors and custom finishes. It is also important to remember that in some cases, when selecting refinish of edges or undersides of panels, the database may not automatically add the necessary clearcoat allowance for these operations. In these cases, there may be additional steps required to take within the estimating system to allow the database to add the necessary clearcoat allowance. Otherwise, a manual entry may be required. Consult the P-pages for your specific estimating systems to determine what is included in the refinish times Paint and Materials -Paint and Materials – paint and material charges typically include the liquid materials used to refinish the repaired areas and any materials used to prepare the repaired areas for refinishing such as surface cleaners, sanding products, and tape. Paint and material charges are calculated automatically by the estimating software, but the paint and material rate may vary from one market to another, and entry of this rate is part of the rate profile setup process. In some cases additional repair materials may be required which are not typically included in standard refinish material calculations. Some examples of these materials include: -Noise, vibration, and harshness (NVH) materials -Seam sealers -Chip-resistant coatings -Corrosion protection materials -Note: When these types of materials are required to complete repairs it may be necessary to create a manual entry or select these items from the parts code table or pre-store list -Additional Charges – another expense related to the refinish process which is not typically included in the paint and material calculations is hazardous waste disposal or EPA charge. Fluids such as antifreeze, oils, and refrigerants may also require hazardous waste disposal when they are collected. Basic Estimating Writing (4/4) Finalizing the Damage Report Subtotals -Subtotals – damage reports typically have subtotal columns for various items. Subtotals typically include: -Parts totals -Labor totals -Sales tax -Sublets -Gross total -Customer responsibility, which typically include deductibles and any betterments -Net total -Note: The subtotal area will also typically show the original estimate total and the totals for any subsequent supplements -Supplements – supplements may be designated by an “S” next to the appropriate line item. Supplements may be additions or subtractions that are made as a result of changes to the original repair plan or hidden damage found after the damage report is finalized. They also may be caused by a change in part prices that occurs in the time between when the damage report was written, and the vehicle is repaired Other Charges -Appearance Allowance – when a vehicle has a damaged part that is a high cost part, but the damage is very minor and of cosmetic nature, the insurance company may request the customer be offered an appearance allowance vs. replacing the part. In this case, the insurance company would offer the vehicle owner a cash settlement for the damage to the part vs. listing the part for replacement on the estimate -Betterment – betterment is the increase in value when a worn or previously damaged part is replaced. This is sometimes referred to as depreciation, but the most common industry term is betterment. The insurance company pays for the unused portion of the item being replaced and the vehicle owner is then responsible for the cost associated with the used portion of the part. Local laws may apply to the application of betterment. Depending on local laws, betterment may be limited to describe the increase in the value of the entire vehicle, while other lays may allow for an adjustment for the increase in value of the damaged part itself. An example of this would be a vehicle that has tires with 40,000 miles and the tires were damaged in a collision. Another example would be a rusted chrome bumper that is damaged in a collision and is replaced. Note: Betterment is typically not applied to non-OEM crash parts used to complete repairs Basics of Bodywork Collision Repairs (T0458E-US.TTC) T0458E-US.TTC-Pre-Test Which statement is NOT correct? MIG/MAG welding of ultra high-strength hot-formed steel is not permitted – X wrong Which statement is correct? Work with aluminum may only be carried out in a separate area of the workshop What criteria does not play a part in the choice of materials? Vehicle weight – X wrong Which statement about the materials of the car body is correct? Aluminum has much greater thermal conductivity than steel Which joining method does NOT require overlapping panels? MIG Soldering Which statement about straightening systems is correct? The straightening system by CAR-BENCH uses software to calculate the fixture installation position – X wrong Which material has the highest thermal conductivity? Aluminum Which material has the lowest melting point? Soft steel – X wrong Which joining method can be used on soft steel, high-strength steel, ultra-high strength hot-formed steel and aluminum? MIG/MAG welding – X wrong With what materials can resistance welding NOT be regularly and efficiently used in the workshops? Ultra high-strength steel, hot-formed – X wrong T0458E-US.TTC-Lesson 1 Intro eLearning Basics of bodywork collision repairs (T0458E-US.TTC) Target group(s) Bodywork experts and bodywork specialists -Overview of body materials -Individual materials -Meaning for the workshop process -Physical properties of materials relevant for the workshop -Material properties and joining techniques for collision repairs -Example: E-Class (W213) – From how many different materials is this bodyshell constructed? 8 -What criteria play a part in the choice of materials? -Passenger safety in collision -Vehicle weight -Production costs -Production technology -Environmental compatibility -Ease of repairs -Body of the E-Class (W213) is composed of 8 different materials. -High-strength steel -Modern high-strength steel -Ultra-high strength steel -Ultra high-strength steel, hot-formed -Aluminum sheet metal -Extruded aluminum sections -Aluminum casting -Composites -Tensile strength = external force and mechanical resistance (impact) -Aluminum has a lower melting point -Aluminum conducts much better than steel T0458E-US.TTC-Lesson 2 -Overview of joining techniques used in the workshop -Procedure -Applicability -Materials -Advantages and disadvantages -Thermal joining techniques (joining by heat) -Unavoidable when heat is applied: -Deformation of the workpiece -Susceptibility to corrosion around the joining point -Change in the material properties (especially strength) -Examples are – Resistance welding, MIG/MAG welding -Non-thermal joining techniques (mechanical connection) -Completely avoid the risks of thermal joining methods -Examples are – Blind rivets, Self-piercing riveting, Flow-form riveting, Clinching, Flow-form bolting, Bonding -Joining techniques -Production -Resistance welding -MIG/MAG welding -MIG soldering -Self-piercing riveting -Clinching -Flow-form bolting -Bonding -Workshop -Resistance welding -MIG/MAG welding -MIG soldering -Blind rivets -Flow-form riveting -Flow-form bolting -Bonding -Overlapping necessary -Resistance welding -Blind rivets -Flow-form riveting -Flow-form bolting -Bonding -Access on both sides needed -Resistance welding -Flow-form riveting -Resistance welding (spot welding) -Overlapping sheets or flange required -Access on both sides required -Thoroughly clean metallic surfaces -Possibly fill zinc dust paint or adhesive into the joint -Current flows between the electrodes -The workpieces begin to melt -Spot-weld forms after cooling -No material is added -Advantages: -No material is added -Thermal load is extremely localized -Disadvantages: -Not suitable for butt joints -Not usable if access is only one-sided -MIG/MAG Welding: -Butt joints possible -One-sided access is sufficient -Thoroughly clean metallic surfaces -Electric arc between electrode and workpieces -The workpieces begin to melt -Melting electrode forms a welding bead -Active or Inert gas prevents oxidation with the surrounding air -Solid joint after cooling -Welding bead forms a sealing seam -Advantages: -Also suitable for butt joints -One-sided access to the joint is sufficient -Creates a sealing seam -Disadvantages: -Adds material -High thermal load -Use with aluminum very complex -MIG Soldering: -Usual for butt joints -One-sided access is sufficient -Electric arc between electrode and workpiece -Solder diffuses into the heated material surfaces -Service information for MIG solder materials: -CuSi3 for non-structural exterior paneling components -CuAI8 for structural components (special case) -Advantages: -Creates a sealing seam -Lower thermal load than when welding -Bridging of joint gaps -One-sided access is sufficient -Disadvantages: -Only suitable for exterior paneling components -Lower joint strength compared to welding -Blind Rivets: -Overlapping sheets or flange required -One-sided access is sufficient -Panels are drilled, deburred and cleaned -Rivet is positioned -Rivet head breaks at the predetermined fracture point when pulled -Mashing tightens the rivet -Advantages: -One-sided access to the joint is sufficient -High joint strength -No adverse material effects from heat -Connection of different materials possible -Disadvantages: -Adds material -Not usable for butt joints -Swarf is formed when drilling -Flow-form Riveting: -Replaces the self-piercing riveting used in production -Overlapping sheets or flanges required -Access on both sides required -Remove self-piercing rivet -Stamp and calibrate rivet hole -Position the rivet -Compact the rivet -Advantages: -Connection of different materials possible -No change in material properties -Connection has very high tensile strength -Appearance close to the original -Disadvantages: -Access on both sides required -Flow-form bolting: -Overlapping sheets or flange required -One-sided access is sufficient -Panels are predrilled: lower panel with a smaller diameter -Tighten the screw -Form the rim hole -Molded thread ensures a strong connection -Compact the rivet -Advantages: -One-sided access is sufficient -No thermal load on the workpieces -Appearance the same as the original -Disadvantages: -Material is added -Swarf is formed when drilling -Bonding: -Overlapping panels -One-sided access is sufficient -Prepare the surfaces (remove paint, roughen, degrease) -Carry out indicator test -Apply two-component adhesive -Connect the workpieces -Fix parts to be joined in place -Avoid mechanical stresses at the joint as the adhesive is curing -Advantages: -Connection of different materials possible -Strong connection over a large area -No thermal load on the workpieces -Adhesive acts as an insulation layer -Disadvantages: -Great cleanliness required -Limited application temperatures -Maximum strength often only after several hours T0458E-US.TTC-Lesson 3 -Overview of straightening system manufacturers approved by Mercedes-Benz -Differences and special features of straightening systems -Celette: -Vehicle-specific -Straightening tool set for each vehicle model series -Fixed installation plan for straightening tool set -Completed installation -Z axis adjustable -Car Bench: -Universal -Only one straightening tool set -Fixed installation plan for each vehicle model series -Completed installation -X, Y, Z axes adjustable T0458E-US.TTC-Post Test Which statement is NOT correct? MIG/MAG welding of ultra high-strength hot-formed steel is not permitted – X wrong Which material has the lowest electrical resistance? Mild steel – X wrong Which material has the lowest melting point? Aluminum Which statement is correct? Work with aluminum may only be carried out in a separate area of the workshop Which material can ONLY be joined by riveting or resistance welding? Ultra high-strength hot-formed steel Which joining method does NOT require overlapping panels? MIG soldering Which joining method can be used on soft steel, high-strength steel, ultra high-strength hot-formed steel and aluminum? Riveting What criteria does not play a part in the choice of materials? Insurance requirements Which material has the highest thermal conductivity? Aluminum Which joining method requires access to both sides of the joined materials? Flow-form riveting Blueprinting for the Estimator Blueprinting -Traditional Estimates – traditional damage estimates identify damages that are visible without the benefit of removing damaged exterior panels to expose the full extent of damage. This will typically result in supplements, multiple parts orders, and repair delays after the vehicle is brought into the repair shop and disassembled for repairs. These repair delays can result in frustration for your customers and insurance partners. -The Blueprint Process – blueprint damage analysis is not just an estimate, it is a discovery process to identify all collision related damage. Blueprinting addresses potentional obstacles at the beginning of the repair process to prevent them from ever becoming a problem. As a part of the blueprinting process, the estimator and the technician will need to: -Review vehicle maker repair information that pertains to the damaged vehicle -Conduct an initial inspection to obtain pre-disassembly photos -Perform a vehicle ‘pre-scan’ prior to starting any disassembly or repairs -Completely disassemble the vehicle in the area of damage -Thoroughly inspect the vehicle and all parts removed to identify all damages -Perform quick checks for suspension and structural damage -Take three-dimensional measurements of the entire vehicle -Review all damages with the blueprint technician, including all parts in need of replacement and any items in need of repair. -Traditional Estimate vs. Blueprinting – lets do a one-to-one comparison of a traditional estimate with the complete estimate that results from blueprinting. -Hidden Damage – with a traditional estimate, hidden damage is not included in the plan because there is not a complete teardown. With a blueprint, all damaged parts are exposed for inspection; there is no hidden damage. -Parts Availability – with a traditional estimate, parts availability is unknown, and pricing is only as accurate as the estimating database. With blueprint, parts availability and pricing may be verified with vendors. -Inspection Location – traditional estimates may be done outside of the facility in a parking lot with no access to a lift. Blueprinting is always done in the facility, ideally where a lift may be used for better access. -Estimates – with a traditional estimate, the estimator makes a decision about the repairability and judgement times without consulting a blueprint technician or disassembling the vehicle. With blueprinting, a blueprinting team sees all the damage and provides input regarding repair times. -Accuracy – during a traditional estimate, structural damage assessment is limited due to a lack of access and no three-dimensional measuring. During blueprinting, measurement identifies any structural damage and puts required repairs in the plan. Pre-pulling may be needed in some scenarios to determine repairability. -Importance and Benefits of Blueprinting – a blueprint for collision repair is like a blueprint for building a house. The construction blueprint and collision repair blueprint identify all the parts, equipment, labor, workforce, and workflow required to get the job done before any work is authorized to begin. Both blueprints contain thorough details for the Statement of Work, leaving nothing open to interpretation. The blueprinting process improves estimate accuracy, reduces repair delays, improves productivity, and reduces cycle time, which leads to improved customer satisfaction index (CSI) scores. -Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) – a Key Performance Indicator (KPI) is a measurable value that demonstrates how effectively a company is achieving key business objectives. Production KPIs include cycle time, touch time, labor efficiency, and others. -Supplements are KPI Killers – one of the goals of the blueprinting process is to eliminate repair supplements. Within the collision repair industry, supplements are viewed as waste and killers of a shop’s KPIs. Supplements have a negative effect on: -Cycle time, as supplements add time to the repair -Technicians touch time, since supplements stop the repair midstream -The parts ordering process, as what you thought was a completed task is no longer and now you must add another parts order -CSI scores, as supplements affect CSI scores due to dissatisfaction with wait time. -Vehicle Maker Repair Information and Pre-Scan – Prior to starting any repairs, vehicle maker service information should be obtained and provided to the blueprint technician. This information can be obtained from many sources, including vehicle maker websites, OEMOneStop, AllData, and the I-CAR RTS website. In addition, it is very important to complete a vehicle scan prior to starting any repairs. This can provide valuable information for the damage analysis process and documents all diagnostic trouble codes (DTCs) present when the vehicle arrived for repairs. -Complete Disassembly – blueprinting involves removing all required parts of the vehicle, not merely to see all the damage, but to discover all hidden damage in order to write a complete estimate. During the blueprinting process, all fasteners or clips are removed for the repair, which allows for the identification of fasteners that will break during disassembly, so they can be ordered with the rest of the parts. -Parts Storage – establishing a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for parts storage is also important. A popular and efficient method of storing parts is the use of a parts cart. During the disassembly process, as parts are removed from the vehicle they are placed on the parts cart. Typically, the parts are arranged on the cart based on their repairability. Also, fasteners may be bagged or placed in plastic storage compartments for easy retrieval. Whatever your method of choice, remain consistent for an efficient blueprinting and repair process. Note: This SOP should also include standards for marking parts to identify repairability and damage location to make identifying damages quick and easy. -For Every Repair – does every vehicle need to go through the blueprinting process, even if the damages appear to be only a crack in the bumper cover? Why differentiate? When you remove the bumper cover, there could be hidden damage underneath or maybe a clip will break during disassembly process. You do not want to discover hidden damage after the vehicle has entered the repair stream. Making 100% teardown an SOP will help ensure that you will avoid surprises later. -For Every Repair Facility – blueprinting is for every size repair facility. If nothing more than complete disassembly is done, this will allow facilities to see what is needed, what will beak, and what parts and sublet labor are needed to get a complete estimate, resulting in a rise in productivity. -Insurance Industry Benefits – blueprinting benefits the insurance industry by reducing the number of supplements, which are the result of an incomplete damage report. Additional benefits include faster in/out times, fewer rental car days, fewer returned parts, and less wasted time. Insurance companies realize that supplements can contribute to repair delays and require resources to process the supplement and possibly re-inspect the vehicle, if necessary. -Staffing a Blueprinting Department – staffing for the blueprinting process varies and is based on the size of the facility and technician expertise. A small facility may have people in dual or even multiple roles, a situation that may have existed even before the implementation of a blueprinting process. In a small facility, the body technician may do the disassembly, working closely with the estimator. A large facility may set up a dedicated blueprinting team. On that team, there may be a body technician responsible for all vehicle disassembly and a dedicated estimator. Diagnostic, mechanical, and frame technicians may be easily accessible during the blueprinting process. -There is Still a Need for Traditional Estimates – traditional estimates are still performed every day for many repair facilities. Traditional estimates are written for a variety of reasons including: -Determining if the vehicle is repairable or a total loss -Scheduling a drivable vehicle in for repairs and pre-ordering parts -Helping a customer who will be paying for the repairs out-of-pocket to get an estimated repair cost. -Traditional Estimates and Blueprinting – while traditional estimates may serve as a guide and to document several facts about the vehicle and the scheduled repairs, the blueprinting process will still be performed when the vehicle arrives for repairs, using the initial estimate as a baseline. This will ensure any damages that were not visible when the traditional estimate was completed are identified before the vehicle enters the repair stream, and any additional parts required can be ordered to minimize delays. -What is Mapping – on-vehicle notes, or vehicle mapping, are notes the shop makes directly on the vehicle exterior using colored markers and symbols shortly after the customer interview. -Mapping – vehicles are mapped with text and symbols to provide a quick, strong visual indication of what will be repaired. The following are examples of information that you may include when mapping -Customer name -Repair order (RO) number -Arrival and delivery dates -Insurance company -Specific areas that should be repaired and not repaired -Agreed-upon customer-pay repairs -Mapping Legends – the facility gains efficiency when everyone in the shop knows the codes and symbols. Vehicle mapping serves as a communication tool throughout the repair and may also become a quality control tool. The production manager can initial on the vehicle to confirm the color, verify that the disassembly is complete, and signal that repair should begin. -What is NOT Marked – do not mark items such as textured parts, oxidized or sun-faded parts, cloth parts, etc., during vehicle mapping. It is highly likely that marking on these parts would result in staining or residual marks remaining on the part, even after washing the vehicle. -Getting Started – implementing a blueprinting process is not a magical cure for all challenges within the collision repair process. However, spending a little more time writing a complete and accurate blueprint for the repair of each vehicle will result in improved efficiency, reduced cycle times, and improved CSI results. The first steps include taking a look at the size and volume of your shop, and next making decisions about your blueprinting SOP and how to staff your blueprint department. It is important to engage all staff members in the development of your blueprinting SOP to ensure everyone is on the same page and working to reach the same goals. Collision/Service: High Voltage Level 1 Training – Awareness (Rivian) High Voltage training – awareness of hazardous voltages, low voltage hazards, battery technology -Hazardous Voltage Definition – The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) recognize voltage greater than or equal to 50V (AC/DC) as Hazardous Voltage -Alternating Current – an electric current that reverses its direction many times a second at regular intervals, typically used in power supplies -Direct Current – an electric current flowing in one direction only -Hierarchy of Controls – see image in Rivian Folder -Hazard Control: Medical Device Signage – development work and vehicles may involve high magnetic and electric fields. Pre-production vehicles are NOT fully tested for compatibility with off-board devices, including active implantable medical devices -if you have an implant, avoid specifically designated areas of high field strength that cause interference. In the event of any interference, leave the area of high field strength immediately. -How to Properly Use a Fire Extinguisher -1. Remove the fire extinguisher from the wall -2. P ull the pin -3. A im at base of fire -4. S queeze the lever -5. S weep from side to side -Summary -Stay calm and remember -1. If a fire arises, use PASS: Pull, Aim, Squeeze, Sweep -2. DO Not attempt if the fire is larger than a wastebasket -3. Do not attempt on batteries in thermal Runaway -4. Evacuate, and sound the alarm if you feel uncomfortable in any way -Incident Reporting – all near-miss events, incidents, and injuries related to electrical hazards MUST be reported to your supervisor and Safety/EHS manager. All shocks must be reported. All employees sustaining shock around high voltage must go for medical examination. -Hazardous Energy Control – Live parts of equipment at 50 volts or higher must be guarded against accidental contact either by: -Locating it in an area only accessible to qualified persons -Placing permanent screens/partitions around the equipment -Placing it on a platform or balcony only accessible to qualified persons -Elevating it up above 8 feet from the floor -Hazard Control: Limited Approach Boundary -Never enter a limit approach boundary without an escort and required PPE -Hazard Control: Lockout – Control of Hazardous Energy – lockout is the process of preventing the flow of stored energy -1. It consists of installing a lock, block, or chain to the energy-isolating device(s) -2. It requires an authorized employee to apply/remove a lock -3. It covers maintenance and servicing tasks -Rivian’s Lockout Program establishes requirements for the control of hazardous energy to prevent injury: -Ensure awareness of hazardous energy sources -Ensure authorized personnel is sufficiently trained -Establish procedures for ensuring a zero-energy state -It is vitally important that you know your role in the lockout program, as related to HV. There are three types of employees who must receive training: affected, authorized, and other -Affected Employees – an affected employee is an individual who operates equipment or an individual who works in an area in which servicing or maintenance activities under lockout are being performed -Authorized Employees – -An authorized employee is an individual who’s authorized to lockout a piece of equipment in order to perform servicing or maintenance activities that piece of equipment -Authorized employees must read and understand the Hazardous Energy Control Procedure -Understand your role in controlling energy -Ensure that affected employees are inform -Must be able to recognize: -Hazardous energy sources -Type and magnitude of the energy available -Methods and means to isolate and control energy -Other Employees- an employee whose work tasks are or might be in an area where lockout/tagout is being performed -Hazard Control: Low Voltage – a low voltage sources with the ability to provide high current are the source of a different type of electrical hazard. High current can cause arc-flash (sparks), high heat, and molten metal which in-turn can burn. Regular 12V batteries or a single lithium-ion cell (~4V), when shorted by a tool or jewelry, for example, can source many hundreds of amps, causing very hot jewelry or arc flashes from the short -Although typical automotive batteries and a single lithium-ion cell are not considered high voltage, please take care in preventing shorts. Remove jewelry, badges, belt buckles, etc., and use insulated tools when necessary -Although typical automotive batteries and a single lithium-ion cell are not considered high voltage, please take care in preventing shorts. Remove jewelry, badges, belt buckles, etc., and use insulated tools when necessary -Hazard Control: Energy of a Single Battery – low voltage sources with the ability to provide high current are the source of a different type of electrical hazard. High current can cause arc-flash (sparks), high heat, and molten metal which in-turn can burn. Even a single battery cell, under the right conditions, can cause a signification reaction -Electricity &amp; Hazardous Voltages -Hazard Understanding: Critical Mass-three key items associated with Shock Injuries are Path of Current, Amount of Current, Amount of Current, and Duration of shock. -Hazards- Current Loop in Building Wiring – - Building wiring has a high potential for a single point of failure. The “hidden path” is through the ground or building itself. -During charging – when plugged in, the vehicle becomes referenced to the earth. In a Pre-Production vehicle, the system is safe to use and touch when plugged into a production charger. All current Rivian vehicles have a very robust Onboard Charger -Future vehicles may not. If not, they will be tagged with a sign if you should take extra precautions. -Wireless charging (if Rivian is involved) will have additional hazards. These hazards can be eliminated by stopping the charging process. Signs will be used. -If you have any concerns, simply unplug the vehicle -Hazards: Preventing Current Loops – don’t make the loop -Isolated HV System- -An isolated system prevents current loops by restricting contact to only one part of the system -No current loop can be formed with a single point of contact -Isolation Monitoring- -Due to an imperfect world, isolation is not guaranteed -Because of this, an isolation monitoring system continuously checks for faults when the vehicle is on -Preventing Loops No Access to HV – 2 key features that keep the general public safe during operation &amp; general maintenance -Non-Accessible HV System and Equipotential Bonding -All energized parts are covered to prevent access. Fingers do not fit in connections (finger-proof) -All metallic parts are connected through the car chassis -Should an isolation fault occur, no current loop can be formed from outside the enclosure -Access Monitoring by BMS or HVIL – -Accessible panels and connectors are monitored by the Battery Management System (BMS) or High-Voltage Interlock Loop (HVIL) system to ensure that the HV system remains closed -If the BMS/HVIL detects an open system, it may shutdown and prevent operation -Instrumentation – R&amp;D Vehicles may have instrumentation built into them for development work. Components may be connected to high voltage systems. All components with orange or high voltage labeling – whether permanent or temporary – must be treated as high voltage electrical work and performed by Qualified Level 2 personnel only. These markings identify components that IEPs are NOT to be working with. -Glued on warning markings? Treat as high voltage -Cables ringed with orange bands made of tape? Treat as high voltage -Cable-tied into something else and wasn’t there yesterday but orange, nonetheless? Treat as high voltage -High Voltage Areas – each facility may have a specific area(s) for HV work. Special care should be taken around and prior to the entry of high voltage areas. Only authorized personnel should enter -Areas of Special Concern- -Battery Production -HV Component Testing and Validation -Static Bucks -Vehicles Under Maintenance -ANY Orange Cables and Conduit -Hazards Control- -Covers and Finger Proofing – covers and finger proof connectors provide protection from inadvertent contact with energized systems. KEY SAFETY ELEMENTS – NO INDIRECT ACCESS. Do not take covers off HV components unless you have the correct Qualification Level (Level 2+). -Bonding and Grounding – the importance of bonding and grounding high voltage equipment cannot be overstated. The purpose of bonding is to ensure that systems have the same electrical potential and avoid electrical shock to the user. Grounding provides a path for conducting electrical energy to the earth to prevent arcing, heating, and explosion during an energy surge. Screws and wires connecting HV parts to the vehicle are used to keep them bonded and grounded. They work to keep you from creating a current loop through your body. Do not disconnect unless you hold the proper Qualification Level. -Marking and Labeling – High voltage labels warn workers and others of the electrocution and arc flash dangers present. This form of visual communication is elemental to HV safety and is a recognized industry practice of OSHA and the NFPA. Many HV components are purposely colored orange to indicate and warn workers of an electrical hazard. High voltage marking includes stickers, labels, imprints, and warning signs that vary in size and color. These markings identify components that you (Level 1) should NOT be working with directly when energized. -Tools and PPE – the importance of the proper tools and PPE when conducting HV activities cannot be overemphasized. As the “last line of defense” they can reduce exposure to hazards when engineering and administrative controls are not feasible or effective at reducing risk to acceptable levels. Both OSHA and the NFPA require their use in certain HV situations. -1. NFPA 70E and OSHA Require Insulated Tools When Working On or Near 50V+ Equipment While Energized. Do not sue HV tools for non-HV work -2. ARC FLASH PPE OSHA 1910.269 &amp; 1926.960. 2.0 calories and above, arc flash clothing is required -3. Insulated tools and PPE are required for LIVE work or when working inside the limited approach boundary. You have not been trained for live work, do not take or use the PPE -Emergency Response Summary – an Emergency Response Guide (ERG) will be published prior to production that first responders can access electronically using the QR code on the vehicle. Until then, this will provide important information in case of an emergency. The label will be affixed to production vehicles. First responders can scan the QR code to obtain emergency information - Preventing Loops – controlling HV hazards boils down to preventing loops and the flow of electrical current through the body. -HV First Response – in the event that someone is actively being shocked – if you can safely break the current loop, do so immediately. Safe means of breaking the loop include Equipment E-Stop Switch, Power Disconnect, and Insulated Rescue Hook. -1. Energy isolating devices are the preferred means to safely break the current loop -2. In the event that no energy isolating devices are able to break the loop; locate the nearest insulated rescue hook/rubber glove kit. Ensure that no part of your body is within 1ft of any metal object, have a steady base stance, wrap the hook securely around the victim and pull the victim clear of all live parts before assessing the individual’s medical needs. Call 911 -HV Program Qualification Levels – qualification levels are attained through the completion of training and demonstration of competency. Additional Qualification Levels are obtained in continuing courses -Level 0 – Lay-Person (LP) – not yet trained. Unaware of electrical systems and risks -Not permitted to work on or operate pre-production vehicles -Follow all safety rules -Must be escorted at all times by someone at a higher qualification level -Level 1 – Informed Electrical Person (IEP) -May escort layperson(s) -Perform tasks that do not present any electrical hazard or have otherwise been addressed by a Skilled Electrical Person -Consult with a Level 2 or higher if a situation is outside their expertise or comfort level -Level 2 – Skilled Electrical Person – Qualified (SEP) -Level 3 – Skilled Electrical Person – Qualified (SEP)+ Live Work Training – Qualified -HV Program Definitions - -Vehicle Operation = Normal Owner Functions -Driving -Cleaning -Wiper Fluid -Charging -Mechanical Work = Work that is very unlikely to cause a HV hazard -Changing tires -Replacing wiper blades -Wiper fluid -Interior work -Mechanical Work w/ Potential HV Hazards = Work that might result in a HV Hazards (now or in the future) -Installing or replacing hoses next to HV cables -Installation of screws into cabin floor (above battery) -HV Electrical Work = any work on any HV components -Ex. Boxes, cables, connectors, sensors, etc. -LIVE HV Electrical Work = work on a component or system that cannot be de-energized -Inside the battery enclosure -Any work while a pre-production vehicle is charging -As Level 1 IEP’s, you will not be able to perform any live work on HV systems until trained and qualified to Level 3 -Lay Person- -Pre-production vehicles -Unsupervised Lay Persons Cannot: -Drive -Service -Clean -Etc. -Informed Electrical Person- -May escort layperson(s) -Perform tsks that don’t present any electrical hazard -May perform some additional work: -Mechanical Work after system deactivation by a SEP -HV Electrical work after systems deactivation by an SEP and with written work instruction High Voltage – Level 1 Quiz True or False: If you have an implant, avoid specifically designated areas of high field strength that cause interference – true In the event of a fire, locate the nearest extinguisher and remember__ - PASS All near-miss events, incidents, and injuries related to electrical hazards MUST be reported to your ____ and the Safety/EHS Manager – Supervisor Never enter a limit approach boundary without an escort and required __- PPE Lockout is the process of ___ the flow of stored energy – Preventing What are the 3 key items associated with Shock Injuries – Path of current, amount of current, duration of shock Controlling HV hazards boils down to preventing loops and the flow of electrical current through the __ - body In the event that someone is actively being shocked – if you can safely break the current loop, do so immediately. Safe means of breaking the loop include (choose the 3 correct answers) – Equipment E-Stop Switch, Power Disconnect, Insulated Rescue Hook True or False: Covers and finger proof connectors provide protection from inadvertent contact with energized systems – true Screws and wires connecting HV parts to the vehicle are used to keep them bonded and __ - grounded Collision Repair of the 2020 General Motors (GM) Corvette C8 (1/2) Module 1 – Corvette C8 Repair Overview -Corvette History – lets being this course with a brief history overview of the Corvette. The C8 is the latest model, making it the 8 th generation. The image shows each generation of the Corvette, and the list below shows the associated model years: -C1, built from 1953-1962 -C2, built from 1963-1967 -C3, built from 1968-1982 -C4, built from 1984-1996 -C5, built from 1197-2004 -C6, built from 2005-2013 -C7, built from 2014-2019 -C8, built in 2020-present -Redesign Overview – for the 8 th generation, only a single plan has been carried over from the prior generation, the seat pan. The most obvious changes it he transition from a front-engine to a mid-engine design. Some additional design changes include: -The door handles, hatch, and hood release. They have been hidden for a clean appearance and improved aerodynamics -A magnetic ride control, available only with the Z51 performance package -A front suspension lift and more -Trim Levels – -The C8 comes in three different trims which include the: -1LT -2LT -3LT -All three trims come with standard features such as: -Rear park assist -Teen driver -The following features are only available on the 2LT and 3LT Models: -HD front and rear vision cameras -Rear cross traffic alert -Side blind zone alert -Repair Information – GM has continued their approach to developing detailed repair procedures with the C8. As with all repairs, technicians must follow the collision repair procedures found at acdelctds.com when performing repairs on the C8 Corvette. This is a pay website with various subscription options -Support Information – there is additional support information available through my.chevrolet.com. you must create a free account which will grant you access to the information instantly. The website includes videos about the C8’s features, operations, configurations, and more -Special Tools – there are special tools required as part of the Collision Repair Network (CRN) to perform repairs to GM vehicles and some that are specific to the C8. An example of these specific tools is a dedicated or universal fixture system. A comprehensive list can be found at genuinegmparts.com. there are other special tools required to perform certain repairs found in the body repair manual (BRM). An example of these tools is a countersink cutting tool. The list includes the suppliers, part numbering, and ordering information -Aluminum Parts- -The majority of the structural parts that make up the vehicle are made from aluminum. This includes the: -Front structure -Floor -Side structure -Top structure -Most of the rear structure -Replacement of these parts include the use of flow drill screws, structural blind rivets, and impact resistant structural adhesive. To view a full list of materials used in the construction of the C8 Corvette, visit the structure identification section in the BRM -Restricted Structural Parts – GM recommends structural repairs to be made by certified GM Collision Repair Network (CRN) or Cadillac Aluminum Repair Network (CARN) shops. The majority of the structural frame parts for the C8 Corvette are put on parts restriction. GM dealerships, as well as independent collision repair facilities, can enroll at genuinegmparts.com. Note: Exterior bolt-on parts are not restricted -Steel Parts- although the new Corvette is primarily made from aluminum, carbon fiber, and sheet-molded compound (SMC), there is some steel found on the vehicle. There are ultra-high-strength steel (UHSS) reinforcement beams found in the door and a small high-strength steel (HSS) reinforcement inside the windshield reinforcements. The steel parts found in the C8 will not be serviced individually but may be found in a service part assembly -Sheet-Molded Compound (SMC) -An array of SMC parts are used on the Corvette. Detailed repair procedures are available in the BRM for these parts which include the: -Rear compartment panel frame -Body upper rear panel -Rear compartment panel -Side door opening frame -Hood -Liftgate -Quarter outer panels -Side doors -Front fenders -Sectioning or partial-panel replacements is not supported by GM unless specifically documented in a service bulletin or repair procedure -Structural Impact Resistance (IR) Adhesive – GM requires the use of adhesive for many repairs. The use of impact resistant adhesive is used in combination of one or more mechanical fasteners such as structural blind rivets and flow drill screws. Adhesives currently meeting GM service requirements include: -Fusor 2098 -3M 07333 -Pilogrip 5770P -Sem 39757 Structural Impact Resistant Adhesive -Structural Carbon Fiber – the rear bumper reinforcement is one part of the vehicle structure made from carbon fiber. GM does not allow repairs to this reinforcement. The bumper reinforcement can be replaced with or without the rear tub removal. There are two part numbers available for the rear reinforcement, depending on which repair is being performed. If the tub is being removed, the new part comes with the brackets. However, if the tub is not being removed, the new part does not come with the brackets -Lifting and Jacking Considerations- -During lifting or jacking of the vehicle, there are special considerations to keep in mind such as: -Using the special lift pad adapter, part number J-43625 -Having the proper clearance for the lift arm or jack to fit under the vehicle -Supporting the vehicle with jack stands at the opposite end from which major parts are being removed. Also, strap the vehicle to the hoist -The pad adapters are inserted on dedicated spots in the front and rear of the undercarriage. Make sure to use and follow the procedures in the BRM to find these locations -Aluminum Repair Recommendations -GM provides repair recommendations and guidelines for aluminum structure replacement on the following: -Aluminum sheets (stamping) -Extrusions, which can only be replaced -Castings, which can only be replaced -Welding of the aluminum should be performed with a dedicated aluminum MIG welder (220 V/Pulse/200 amp minimum) with 0.035”, 5554 wire. If replacing aluminum panels with impact-resistance adhesive, the use of non-open flame heat can be used, but not exceed 392 degrees Fahrenheit (200 degrees Celsius) for more than 3 consecutive minutes to help release the adhesive -Attachment Methods- -Attachment methods for service parts on the C8 include: -Flow drill screws -Structural blind rivets -Aluminum MIG welding -IR structural adhesive -There is very little MIG welding used during production or service of the C8. GM does not recognize any aluminum STRSW for service use -Floor Structure – -The floor structure is constructed of aluminum, and it is compromised of the following parts: -Number 2 crossbar -Number 3 crossbar -Tunnel panel -Tunell panel reinforcement -Front floor panel -These parts can be replaced individually. Attachment materials for the replacement of these parts include impact resistant (IR) structural adhesive, structural blind rivets, and flow drill screws. Some repairs may call for one or a combination of all materials -Windshield Replacement- -During the replacement of the windshield, the multifunction sensor bracket needs to be removed. It is not necessary to remove the parts from the bracket. If paint repairs of the pinchweld are required, mask the flange bonding area prior to applying the color coat in order to provide a clean, primer-only surface. Approved products for this application include: -BASF DE15 -DuPont 2610 -Sherwin-Williams PSE 4600 and NP70 Martin-Senour 5120 and 5130 -PPG DG90LF SPIES/HECKER 3688/8590-3688/5150-4070/5090 -STANDOX 11158/13320-14653/14980 products are approved for this application -Convertible/Retractable Hardtop – the C8 convertibles have an electric top that includes four motors and four modules. The Hall effect sensors that are part of the system come with the complete top assembly. The motors and modules are the only parts that are serviceable from a mechanical standpoint. There are mechanical overrides that allow the top to be removed. One thing to note is that when removing the top manually, make sure to operate and inspect for any odd movement or binding due to bend linkages Collision Repair of the 2020 General Motors (GM) Corvette C8 (2/2) Module 2 – Mechanical, ADAS, and Electrical Overview -Suspension – the C8 Corvette is available with a couple different suspension optinos including a standard short/long arm (SLA) double wishbone system or a magnetic ride control system. The standard SLA suspension includes forged aluminum upper and L- shaped cast aluminum lower control arms. The magnetic ride control system adds accelerometers in the suspension to actively read the road surface and provide input to the ECU, which makes adjustments to the suspension. It is important to identify which systems the vehicle has. This avoids repair delays resulting from incorrect parts orders. -Front Suspension Lift- there is also a front lift with memory option available on the 2LT and 3LT models. This feature allows the driver to lift the front of the vehicle as much as two inches, at speeds under 24 mph (39 km/h) to help clear obstacles like speed bumps, uneven roads, and curbs. This option integrates GPS, making it possible for the driver to set specific locations that the system will remember and automatically adjust. The front suspension lift system consists of front shock absorbers with built-in two-position lift actuators, hoses, lines, hydraulic fluid reservoir, and an electro-hydraulic control unit. If the hydraulic system is opened for any type of repair, a bleeding procedure needs to be performed. Make sure to follow the Front Hydraulic Suspension Bleeding procedures in the BRM. NOTE: the suspension uses DOT 4 brake fluid, just like the brake system -Battery Sensor Module – -Some vehicles may be equipped with a battery sensor module (BSM) that is used to determine the battery condition, including state of charge and health. This sensor is attached to the negative terminal and monitors all current entering or exiting the battery. Any action that charges or discharges the battery, that is not monitored by the BSM, requires the system to be calibrated. Examples requiring calibration include: -Replacing the battery -The battery is charged outside the vehicle -The BSM is disconnected -When repairing a vehicle equipped with a BSM, it is important to reference the service information to determine if any of the repairs performed require a calibration -Access to Dead Battery – if the battery is dead and you need to gain access to it, there is a manual key on the fob to gain access to the vehicle. The tumbler is located under the driver door vent. There is a latch cable under the dash that allows you to open the front hood. The latch has two points. Pull once to release it and the second time to open it -Transmission Fluid and Fill – when filling the transmission with fluid, it is important that you use TITAN EG FFL4 which is the recommended fluid by GM. Make sure that the containers are shaken to stir the additives before pouring. GM also recommends using a six point metric socket to avoid rounding of filler plug. There are two detailed fluid fill procedures available in the service information. One is for normal driving conditions and the other is for track use -Transmission Park Release Tool – in the event that the vehicle needs to be moved, but does not allow to shift out of park, there is an electronic park brake release procedure. If the procedure does not release the transmission park brake, it may be necessary to mechanically release the transmission park brake. When performing this procedure, the manual park release tool must be held in position to move the vehicle. The tool will break free at 40 Nm (29.50 ft-lbs), so the park pawl cannot be overstressed -Front and Rearview Camera – -The curbview camera system consists of the following parts: -Rearview camera -Frontview camera left -Frontview camera right -Video processing control module -Radio -There are no static calibrations for any of these cameras in the event they are removed or replaced. Calibrations are automatically initiated during each ignition cycle. However, if the video processing module is replaced, programming needs to be performed, followed by a calibration. In the event that a frontview camera is replaced, there is a self-learn cycle that requires the vehicle to be driven -Video Processing Module Programming and Calibration – if a video processing module is replaced, make sure that before programming or diagnostics, the scan tool is equipped with the latest software. Also, make sure that the battery voltage is stable by using a battery maintainer. Do not use a battery charger. The procedures for programming are found in the service procedures. They have step-by-step tasks to include follow-up procedures with links. After you program the module, drive the vehicle to perform a dynamic calibration. There are certain conditions listed in the procedure that will reduce calibration time. If the module is not calibrated properly, you will see an hourglass icon on the surround vision system screen. Additionally, a DTC is set. One or more of the scan tool camera alignment learn parameters will display “Not Calibrated” -ADAS Features and Calibrations -The C8 is equipped with the following ADAS: -Rearview Camera -Heads-Up Display -Side Blind Zone -Rear Park Assist -Lets take a look at some of these systems and calibration/programming requirements -Bumper Repairs Near ADAS – per GM, repairs to bumpers/fascias with ADAS is limited to topcoat refinishing only. Topcoat refinish materials thickness must not exceed 13 mils in thickness. Any bumper or fascia equipped with ADAS that requires substrate repair must be replaced -Vehicle Intelligence Platform -Vehicle Intelligence Platform (VIP) is GM’s new electrical architecture. Some examples of features found on the new platform include: -More bandwidth for advanced vehicles -Energy efficiency -Upgraded diagnostics -Programming in OFF mode, unlike current architectures -Increased security against cyber attacks Collision/Service: Rivian EHS High Voltage Glove Protocol The purpose of this course is to provide you with necessary information on how to perform inspections that comply with the rules and regulations of High Voltage Insulating Rubber Gloves -Rubber Insulators – -High Voltage Insulating Rubber Gloves must be tested annually -After each annual test, there is a one-year timeframe for the rubber insulators to be put into service -They can only be in service for a total of 6 months -All rubber insulators must undergo an end-user inspection prior to each use -Any item which is damaged or has obvious defects must be taken out of service immediately -Leather Protectors – -All leather protectors must undergo an end-user inspection prior to each use -Any item which is damaged or has obvious defects must be taken out of service immediately -Training- -All employees who will be using high voltage gloves will need to complete the high voltage levels 1&amp;2 courses Where to order? Grainger -Testing and Storage -Pre-Task Testing – all High Voltage Insulating Rubber Gloves must undergo an end-user inspection before each use. -Six Month Testing – all High Voltage Insulating Rubber Gloves must undergo a six-month inspection by Grainger. Follow the steps below when submitting for inspection -Step 1 – gather all gloves that need to be tested -Step 2 – get a count of sizes and pairs -Step 3 – Complete a Grainger Dielectic Testing Services Order Form: -1. Input customer information -2. Input the number of pairs in the “Quantity Sent” column and the appropriate row -3. Input the PO# in the “Customer Purchase Order Number” -Step 4 – -1. Create a shipping label and mail it to: -Skarshaug Testing Laboratory, INC 505 South Bell Ames, IA 50010 -2. Create a return label to come back to your location -Step 5 – place the order form and return label in the package and ship the package to the recipient -Storage -HV Glove Bags – ensure gloves are stored in a bag when not in use -HV Cabinet – store the gloves in a high voltage cabinet or an area where other objects will not impact them -Spares – each site should have at least 2 spares in each size -Expiration Date – write the expiration date on the outside of each glove box -Summary – -Always Wear Your Gloves – High Voltage Insulating Rubber Gloves are the first line of defense against shock and electrocution. It is imperative that you follow the guidelines outlined in this course to ensure your safety and the safety of others. If you have questions or concerns, reach out Alex Rich – email – Alex.Rich@grainger.com Rivian EHS Service – email – ServiceEHS@rivian.com Collision Network Team – email – CertifiedCollisionNetwork@rivian.com For questions or comments about this course, please email CollisionTraining@Rivian.com Composite Repair Overview (1/3) -Composites – composites are materials made up of two or more parts or elements -Fiber-Reinforcement – composite plastics contain some type of fiber-reinforcement as one of those elements and is also infused with a resin. The versatility of design possibilities allows a wide range of use. Vehicle makers may use composite materials for a variety of applications such as aerodynamics, fenders, hoods, roofs, doors, trim, or reinforcements as well as other applications. Composites are very common on RVs and heavy trucks. -Plastics – most of the composites used are thermoset type materials; however, thermoplastic composites are used in some applications. All repairs to composite parts should follow original equipment manufacturer (OEM) procedures. While many parts are repairable, I-CAR warns against repairs to parts such as reinforcements or safety-related parts unless an OEM procedure exists. -Repair Materials – parts are strongest when manufactured as the materials are formed together in a mold. Repairs act as a secondary bond that depend on the ability of the repair materials to adhere to the original materials; therefore, it is important to use the repair materials designed for the composite being repaired. -Composite Types – FRP is a general term for Fiber-Reinforced Plastics and represents any fiber a composite contains. Composites can contain glass fibers or carbon fibers. Carbon Fiber-Reinforced Plastics (CFRPs) are simply FRPs where the fibers are made of carbon. FRPs do not always contain carbon fibers but when they do are considered a CFRP -Composite Working Hazards – there are certain working hazards present when working with composites. Product specific safety data sheets (SDS) identify the specific personal safety equipment required when working with composites. Some hazards include: -Dust from sanding, cutting, or grinding the composite -Skin contact with cleaning solvents and repair materials -Inhaling cleaning solvent vapors -Composite materials -* It is important to perform composite repairs in a properly ventilated area -Safety Equipment – when working with composites, the right safety equipment will play a key role in preventing injury and protecting your health. It is important to always wear eye protection to help prevent eye injury. You should wear either safety goggles or safety glass. Fractured or splintered composites, particularly carbon fiber, can be extremely sharp; wearing hand protection such as leather gloves, especially when damaged fibers are exposed, is important. Wear nitrile gloves to avoid skin contact with any type of adhesive used during the repair. Dustless sanding uses a vacuum to collect grinding dust which will help minimize your exposure to it. Sanding dust generated when working with composites, including carbon fiber dust is a lung and eye irritant. You should wear a NIOSH P100 combination respirator to prevent fibers or any gasses from getting into your lungs when grinding or cutting carbon fiber parts. Composite Repair Overview (2/3) FRP Characteristics -Fiberglass and composite repairs may be uncommon but they are still performed in the industry. When working with composites, there are certain abbreviations that are used, which may be confusing at times. Some of the most common abbreviations refer to; Fiber-Reinforced Plastic (FRP) which is a term generally used to describe several different composites. It refers to composites that contain some amount of fiber-reinforcement material, sheet-molded compound (SMC) which is smooth on both sides with no visible fibers, unless the part is cracked. SMCs may require both sides of the part to be finish sanded. An SMC part cannot be repaired using fiberglass repair materials or plastic welds. Do NOT use fiberglass repair materials with SMC because of the fillers and mold release agents in it that can cause adhesion problems when you combine the two. Do NOT use adhesion promoters, or attempt the pinning process on any FRP repairs. -FRP and SMC Identification Continued – SMCs can be used in multiple locations on a vehicle primarily for weight reduction and their ability to be molded into complex shapes. Carbon-Fiber-Reinforced Plastics (CFRPs) specify the type of fiber being used in a part. Carbon fibers are used as the reinforcing material in a CFRP. Long-Fiber-Reinforced Plastic (LFRT) is a type of fiber-reinforcement combined with a type of thermoplastic. This type of FRP is also more specific about the makeup of the part. Traditional fiberglass is made by saturating fiberglass cloth or mat with polyester resin. It is not commonly used in modern vehicle construction, but is very popular in add-on custom parts, as well as water craft and RVs. Fiberglass parts usually start with a gel coat that is applied to a waxed mold; then, the fiberglass and resin are hand applied, or spray applied when parts are manufactured. This leaves a smooth outer surface and a rough backside texture. Repairs can be done using polyester resin and fiberglass cloth or mat -One-Sided Cosmetic Repair – one-sided cosmetic repairs primarily include scratches or gouges. Perform one-sided repairs on damage that does not go through to the backside of the part. One-sided repairs are sometimes done on multiple areas of the same part, and may only require feathering and priming the repair area. Feathering of the repair area might be necessary as well as the use of filler. -Two-Sided Repair – two-sided repairs include cracks, tears, or punctures that go through to the backside or have damage to the fibers. This type of damage requires a filler on the front side and a backing material applied to the backside -FRP Repair Considerations – before making any type of repair it is important to ensure that the repair area is free from dirt and other contaminants. -Step 1 – wash the part with soap and water. Tape over damage to prevent liquids from entering the damaged area. Fibers can wick solvents and trap them in the repair area. -Step 2 – clean with a plastic cleaner recommended by the product maker to remove non water-soluble contaminants -Starting a Single-Sided Repair – to complete a single-sided repair, scuff the part by hand or with a sander using the product makers recommended sandpaper grit. Take care not to damage the fibers. Gradually taper the repair area then clean the area with a vacuum or a dry cloth. Apply repair material to the area following product maker mixing instructions. Sand the repair area to contour after the product has cured, finishing with the paint maker’s recommended grit for primer. -FRP Repair Plan Inspection – FRP parts will not dent or crush, but will crack when struck with enough force. Check FRP parts for secondary damage, such as cracks near mounting locations. Make sure to inspect the backside of the part for any micro-cracking. -Starting a Two-Sided Repair – there are certain steps that should be performed when starting a two-sided repair -Step 1 – remove any loose or damaged fibers with an air saw or a die grinder -Step 2 – taper the front side of the repair. Sand the repair and/or taper the backside of the repair, if recommended. Start by using a grinder with P40 grit. Then, sand with a power sander and P80 grit -Step 3 -clean the repair area with a dry cloth or a vacuum -FRP Backing – use FRP backing on any two-sided FRP repair. This can be in the form of a scrap piece of the same material. It can also be made of a fiberglass cloth or backing tape. This backing must overlap the damaged area. The recommended amount of backing overlap varies by product maker. A general recommendation is a ¾” to 2” overlap on all sides of the damage Fiberglass cloth on left. Scrap material on right -Applying FRP Backing – to apply FRP backing to a repair you will need to take certain steps -Step 1 – apply aluminum tape to the front side to prevent the repair material from falling through the front of the repair area -Step 2 – apply a layer of composite repair adhesive to the repair area in a pool, keeping the static tip submerged in the product. Spread the product while applying firm pressure to ensure tight application of the adhesive. Static tip submerged on the left. Spread product while applying firm pressure on the right. -Step 3 – press the backing material into the composite repair adhesive, making sure to use firm pressure -Step 4 – apply another layer of composite repair adhesive over the backing and cover it, making sure to cover all edges with adhesive. * Note: some product makers have special instructions for their composite repair adhesive. For example, some makers have adhesives that need to be heated in order to cure -Applying Exposed Backing – when applying a backing that is exposed, you must use additional backing material to ensure repair strength and stability. The backing material must be below the final level of the repair. Otherwise, it may be visible and the repair will have to be re-done -Pyramid Patch – a pyramid patch is an alternative method of repair involving a patch built up with alternate layers of the repair product and a fiber cloth or mesh. To make a pyramid patch, you will need to take specific steps. Red = adhesive. White = reinforcement Gray = aluminum tape Black = SMC -Step 1 - clean and scuff the backside repair area, then clean up dust with a vacuum. Once the part is clean, apply aluminum tape to the front side to prevent adhesive from seeping through -Step 2 – Once aluminum tape is applied to the front side, apply the composite repair adhesive to the backing of the backside. Make sure to cover the entire backing patch and allow the layer to cure -Step 3 – remove the aluminum tape from the front side and sand down the top or face of the front side of the part, creating a repair taper -Step 4 – apply another layer of composite repair adhesive followed by more cloth or mesh followed by another layer of composite repair adhesive. Continue to add layers to increase the size of the backing until you achieve the desired thickness. The last layer applied should be adhesive. Allow the patch to cure then sand the front side of the part to a smooth finish. -FRP Front-Side Repair – to perform an FRP front-side repair, remove the plastic film or tape. Sand any exposed repair material that came through from the backside. Next, clean the repair area. Do not use solvents, as the fibers are still exposed and can wick the solvents into the FRP. Overfill the repair material to allow for sanding. The material used for the front side repair may be different than the material used for the backside repair because some product makers have different materials for front-side and backside repairs -Sanding FRP Front-Side Repairs – once the repair material has cured, begin by sanding the repair. Progression from P80 to P220 grit is typical, and you will need to featheredge the repair area with a power sander, and then with a block sander to featheredge and ensure even panel lines. Once the repair area has been block sanded, clean the area with a dry cloth or a vacuum, then check the area for pinholes. Apply a glaze coat if needed. Composite Repair Overview ( 3 /3) -Chopped/Forged Carbon Fiber Composites – chopped carbon fiber comes in a wide variety of appearances, including parts that look similar to SMC. While these parts are smooth on both sides they are typically stronger, lighter, and thinner than traditional SMC. The main different between the two is that a carbon fiber part contains carbon fibers for reinforcement of the composite -Chopped Carbon Fiber – chopped carbon fiber may look similar to a fine febered fiberglass. This type of carbon fiber panel will have the appearance of very fine fibers that lie in random directions. While these parts look similar to fiberglass they are extremely thin, light, and stronger in comparison -Painted Body Panels – identifying painted body panels as carbon fiber may be easy to miss. Use the same steps to identify them as those used for traditional composites -Woven Carbon Fiber – woven carbon fiber parts are lighter and stronger than chopped carbon fiber parts. The way that the different weave patterns are oriented can give the part extreme strength while keeping the part very thin. Structural and non-structural parts can be carbon fiber. Carbon fiber is not limited to body panels. Drive shafts, suspension parts, the passenger cell, structural reinforcements, and even engine and transmission parts can be carbon fiber as well. Exposed weave carbon fiber parts are what everyone thinks of when they hear the words “carbon fiber”. If the part is on the exterior of the vehicle, the part will have a special clear gelcoat or clearcoat from the vehicle maker to give it ultraviolet (UV) protection. -Carbon Fiber Challenges – some challenges with a carbon fiber repair include its inability to be repaired if the damage extends to an edge. It also cannot be duplicated if the exposed carbon fiber weave is cracked. You cannot recreate the exact weave pattern of a tool-faced surface and it cannot be buffed if damage goes through the clearcoat on tooled-faced surfaces -Carbon Fiber Manufacturing Process – epoxies, vinyl ester, polyester, and nylon make up carbon reinforcement resin in many cases -Autoclave Process – the resin and carbon fibers are cured in an autoclave with high heat (300 degrees F) and pressure at 100 psi. An autoclave is kind of like a pressurized over that can be used to create a carbon fiber part. The parts can also be made without the use of an autoclave, but most of the vehicle makers use the autoclave to produce their parts -Carbon Fiber Downfalls – carbon fiber dust can short circuit electrical tools because it is a conductive material. The dust is also very hazardous to breathe, so you should use the appropriate particulate respirator. The raw or exposed carbon fiber can cause galvanic corrosion when it comes into contact with metal. But once it has been imbedded in the resin, the galvanic corrosion problem is eliminated -Carbon Fiber Failure Types – there are several types of failure that can occur when working with composites. Disbonded = top left Punctured or Cracked = top right Core Damaged = bottom -Delamination – delamination of a composite part occurs when one ply separates from another ply. This may happen as a result of low-energy impact or a manufacturing defect, and is sometimes visible if the delamination is near the surface -Disbonding – disbanding occurs when a ply separates from a dissimilar material from the core material ply separation -Core Damage – core damage is damage to the core material of a part that can happen along with any other type of damage -Cracking and Punctures – high energy impacts can crack or puncture composite parts and is the easiest failure type to see. Damage often occurs to the leading edge of a part. Damages that extend to an edge are more complicated to repair. When working with carbon fiber it is also important to inspect the part for secondary damage. * The edge may or may not be repairable depending on whether or not the manufacturer has a suggested repair procedure -Visual Inspections – when performing a visual inspection, a slight wave or ripple may be an indicator of damage. Scuff marks may also indicate an area of damage. Inspect the surrounding area even if damage appears to be minor. The part may have visible damage to the fibers on the backside of the impact area. If access is limited to one side of the part, a visual inspection can be limited. Looking for delamination damage can also be limited. Visual indicators of delamination are not always present on the outside of a part. -Tap Testing – a tap hammer is effective at identifying ply delamination. The technician listens for a change in sound while tapping back and forth across the suspected damage and places a small mark just where the tone changes -Testers – sophisticated test equipment can be used to detect damage to composite parts. Thermal imaging test equipment detects damage and can create an image or graphical representation of the damage using heat variations to create a visual display. Extensive training is required to accurately interpret the information produced by this equipment. You may also use resonance and ultra-sonic testers to detect damage. Both resonance and ultra-sonic testers use frequency waves to detect damage and create an image or graphical representation of the damage. Resonance testers use lower frequency waves to produce this information while ultra-sonic testers use higher frequency waves. Extensive training is required to interpret the information produced by these testers as well. -Repair Options – there are several repair options for carbon fiber depending on the damage and the specific vehicle maker repair procedures. Repair options include buffing or cosmetic repair, composite-type repair, and vacuum bagging. -Cosmetic or Buffing – cosmetic repairs are performed on surface scratches and damage that can be buffed out easily -Composite – composite-type repairs use the same products and techniques as SMC repairs when a pyramid patch is recommended. Keep in mind that this type of repair can only be used for cosmetic applications because they are weaker than carbon fiber and do not have the same performance standards -Vacuum Bagging – there are many different options and steps required to make a vacuum bagging repair. This type of repair involves each of the damaged plies being removed and replaced in the damaged area. The repair is then compressed and heated to cure the repair. Definitions and Operations - Carbon Fiber-Reinforced Plastics (CFRP ) – are simply Fiber-Reinforced Plastics (FRP) where the fibers are made of carbon. FRPs do not always contain carbon fibers but when they do are considered CFRP. -Fiber Glass- parts usually start with a gel coat that is applied to a waxed mold. Then, the fiberglass and resin are hand applied, or spray applied when parts are manufactured. This leaves a smooth outer surface and a rough backside texture. Repairs can be done using resin and fiberglass cloth or mat. -Fiber-Reinforced Plastics (FRP)- represents any fiber a composite contains. Composites can contain glass fibers or carbon fibers. DO NOT use adhesion promoters, or attempt the pinning process on and FRP repair. These parts will not dent or crush, but will crack when struck with enough force. Check FRP parts for secondary damage, such as cracks near mounting location. Make sure to check the backside of the part for any micro-cracking. -FRP Backing- use FRP backing on any two-sided repair. This can be in the form of a scrap piece of the same material. It can also be made of a fiberglass cloth or backing tape. This backing must overlap the damaged area. The recommended amount of backing overlap varies by product maker. A general recommendation is a ¾” to 2” overlap on all sides of the damage. -Applying Exposed Backing – when applying a backing that is exposed, you must use additional backing material to ensure repair strength and stability. The backing material must be below the final level of the repair. Otherwise, it may be visible and the repair will have to be re-done. -Long Fiber-Reinforced Plastic (LFRP) – is a type of fiber-reinforcement combined with a type of thermoplastic. This type of FRP is also more specific about the makeup of the part. -Pyramid Patch – is an alternative method of repair involving a patch built up with alternate layers of the repair product and a fiber cloth or mesh. -Step 1 -Clean and scuff the backside repair area, then clean up dust with a vacuum. Once the part is clean, apply aluminum tape to the front side to prevent adhesive from seeping through. -Step 2- Once aluminum tape is applied to the front side, apply the composite repair adhesive to the backing of the backside. Make sure to cover the entire backing patch and allow the layer to cure. -Step 3- Remove the aluminum tape from the front side and sand down the top or face of the front side of the part, creating a repair taper. -Step 4- Apply another layer of composite repair adhesive followed by more cloth or mesh followed by another layer of composite repair adhesive. Continue to add layers to increase the size of the backing until you achieve the desired thickness. The last layer applied should be adhesive. Allow the patch to cure then sand the front side of the part to a smooth finish. -Sheet Molded Compound (SMC) – is smooth on both sides with no visible fibers unless the part is cracked. SMC’s require both sides of the part to be finish sanded. An SMC part cannot be repaired using fiberglass repair materials or plastic welders. DO NOT use fiberglass repair materials with SMC because of the fillers and mold release agents in it that can cause adhesion problems when you combine the two. - Single Sided Repair - primarily include scratches or gouges. Perform one-side repairs on damage that does not go through to the backside of the part. One-sided repairs are sometimes done on multiple areas of the same part and may require only feathering and priming the repair area. Feathering of the repair area might be necessary as well as the use of filler -Step 1 -wash the part with soap and water. Tape over damage to prevent liquids from entering the damaged area. Fibers can wick solvents and trap them in the repair area. -Step 2 -clean with a plastic cleaner recommended by the product maker to remove non water-soluble contaminants -To complete a single sided repair, scuff the part by hand or with a sander using the product makers recommended sandpaper grit. Take care not to damage the fibers. Gradually taper the repair area then clean the area with a vacuum or a dry cloth. Apply repair material to the area following product maker mixing instructions. Sand the repair area to contour after the product has cured, finishing with the paint makers recommended grit for repair -Two-Sided Repair - include cracks, tears, or punctures that go through to the backside or have damage to the fibers. This type of damage requires a filler on the front side and a backing material applied to the backside. -Step 1 – remove any loose or damaged fibers with an air saw or a die grinder. (AKA literally cut a circle around the loose or damaged fibers) -Step 2 -taper the front side of the repair. Sand the repair and/or taper the backside of the repair, if recommended. Start by using a grinder with P40 grit. Then, sand with a power sander and P80 grit. -Step 3 -clean the repair area with a dry cloth or a vacuum. -Applying FRP Backing -Step 1 -Apply aluminum tape to the front side to prevent the repair material from falling through the front of the repair area -Step 2 -Apply a layer of composite repair adhesive to the repair area in a pool, keeping the static tip submerged in the product. Spread the product while applying firm pressure to ensure tight application of the adhesive. -Step 3- Press the backing material into the composite repair adhesive, making sure to use firm pressure. -Step 4 -Apply another layer of composite repair adhesive over the backing and cover it, making sure to cover all edges with adhesive. Note: some product makers have special instructions for their composite repair adhesive. For example, some makers have adhesives that need to be heated in order to cure. -FRP Front-Side Repair- To perform an FRP Front side repair, remove the plastic film or tape. Sand any exposed repair material that came through from the backside. Next, clean the repair area. Do not use solvents, as the fibers are still exposed and can wick the solvents into the FRP. Overfill the repair material to allow for sanding. The material used for the front side repair may be different than the material used for the backside repair because some product makers have different materials for the front-side and backside repairs. -Sanding FRP Front-Side Repair- Once the material has cured, begin by sanding the repair. Progression from P80 to P220 grit is typical, and you will need to featheredge the repair area with a power sander, and then with a block sander to featheredge and ensure even panel lines. Once the repair area has been block sanded, clean the area with a dry cloth or a vacuum, then check the area for pinholes. Apply a glaze coat if needed. Convenience Systems Operation and Service (1/4) Vehicle Access -Introduction to convenience systems – comfort and convenience systems used to be found primarily in luxury vehicles. Now many of these systems come as standard features, such as: -Keyless entry -Security -Integrated smartphone apps -Remote app-based vehicle functionality -Power Lock Systems- -Power lock systems typically include: -Door lock assemblies -Cables or linkages -Switches -Actuators -Control modules -Control modules process commands to lock or unlock the vehicle. When a specific speed is reached or when the transmission is shifted into DRIVE, the locks may automatically engage. On some vehicles, these settings can be customized in the driver information center. Newer vehicles may use interior switches, key fobs, and smartphone applications to lock and unlock vehicle. -Part Replacement Considerations- -To service power locks, you will need to access the inside of the door or tailgate. Some considerations for removing the lock actuator include the following: -The actuator is usually part of the latch assembly -The outside handle, glass, and run channels may need to be removed -The latch assembly may come out with a door module assembly that includes the window regulator -The cables and linkage can be difficult to remove and may be attached to plastic parts that can break -Follow the removal procedures found in the service information to avoid damage and be efficient. Remember that an adjustment, calibration, or initialization may need to be performed after parts are reinstalled -Keyless Entry – -a keyless entry system controls access to the vehicle without using a traditional mechanical key. These systems typically use an electronic control module to activate motors or actuators that control the vehicle locks. Keyless entry may be divided into two categories: -Active keyless entry, which requires a button be pushed on the fob to unlock the doors or deck lid -Passive keyless entry, where the fob only needs to be within a certain distance from the vehicle to unlock the doors and other closure panels. Having the fob inside the vehicle will allow the engine to start using a push-button -Keyless Entry Fob – some vehicles have a button on the outside door handle. This allows you to lock the doors if the key fob is in your pocket. The antenna system knows where the key fob (remote) is in relationship to the vehicle. It consists of several antennas with small detection zones. Knowing this and their locations can assist troubleshooting when a fob may have an intermittent communication issue. Fobs may be customizable to allow different driver profiles to be assigned. The vehicle settings will adjust depending on the fob used. Decklids may have a button on the outside to open them, but you may need the fob on you for it to work -Keyless Entry by Smartphone – most vehicles manufactured today have some way to integrate a smartphone with the vehicles system. Many now allow you to use a smartphone as your key fob. Some advantages to using a phone are: -You do not need to carry a fob -Phones may offer better encryption than a fob -You can transfer the “Key” to someone else that needs to use the vehicle -Keyless Entry Parts – common parts of a keyless entry system include: -Keyless entry transmitters -Antennas which are located throughout the interior to cover the entire vehicle -Control modules -Exterior lighting -Exterior speaker for confirmation chirp or beep -Security System – the typical theft-deterrent system is designed to sound an alarm and flash the exterior lights during forced entry. These systems have been improved over the years to include advanced electronics that detect intrusion and limit theft. Some factory security systems include: -A telematics subscription service to locate and strategically disable the vehicle if in motion -Engine immobilizer that activate if anything other than the proper key is used to start the vehicle -A security horn, which may be powered independent of the battery -A security indicator lamp -Security System Sensors- -Theft-deterrent systems operate when the doors are locked. The system may monitor interior movement, noise, latches, and vehicle movement. It sets off an alarm when specific criteria are met. Some of the sensors include: -Motion detection sensors inside the vehicle -Listening devices to detect the sound of glass breaking -Inclination sensors to detect an attempt to raise the vehicle -Some systems use the ajar switches on the doors, hood, and other closure panels. These may be checked three times per second by the security system to make sure the panels remain closed. If a switch status changes, it will set off the alarm -Security System Smartphone Features -smartphone alerts may be available through subscription services. They may include alerts for an attempt to enter the vehicle or when the vehicle is stolen. Depending on the system, additional features may include: -Ignition block -Stolen vehicle slow down -GPS location service -Some vehicles include a subscription service with the purchase of a new vehicle for a limited time. If it isn’t renewed after that time, many of the features may not be available. Additionally, the subscription service may not work if the vehicle is taken out of the country it was purchased in -Service Considerations -Most theft-deterrent system parts are integrated with other vehicle systems. Look for related diagnostic trouble codes (DTC) when performing a vehicle scan to aid in the troubleshooting process. Common system faults may include the: -System not arming -Alarm not sounding or the proper lights not flashing -System arming when the doors or lids are open -The horns are the most susceptible part to incur damage in a front-end collision. Working on a vehicle with low-battery condition may cause the security system to activate or act erratically. Disconnecting and reconnecting the battery may also activate a security system. Take steps to keep the battery charged and reference service information for battery disconnect and reconnect procedures Convenience Systems Operation and Service (2/4) Power Accessories – Mirrors, Glass, and Wipers -Power Mirrors- -In addition to power adjustment and features of the mirror itself, power side mirrors on vehicles may be integrated with a number of systems including: -Blind spot alert -360 degree surround view -Park assist -On some vehicles, the mirrors may angle downward when the vehicle is in reverse. It may be programmed to automatically fold in when the ignition is off and the vehicle is locked. Always reference vehicle-maker service information to identify which systems are on the vehicle. Be sure to perform all necessary calibrations and initializations -Power Mirror Operation – Power mirrors are typically controlled by a switch that directs power to the appropriate mirror control circuit when the directional button is pushed. On older vehicles, pushing the button may have provided power directly to the mirror motor. On modern vehicles, pushing the button typically sends a signal to a control module that sends the command signal to the mirror motor relay. System parts commonly associated with a power mirror assembly include: -Control switches -A fuse or relay -Position sensors -Mirror motors or drive mechanisms -A motor for the power folding option -Power Mirror Options – optional equipment that may be included with a power mirror assembly includes: -Heated mirror glass for defrosting -Electrochromatic or auto-dimming mirrors to reduce headlamp glare -Memory systems to recall a previous adjustment -Turn signals in the mirror -Telescoping mirrors -Passenger side park assist mirrors -Puddle lighting -Power Windows – -A power window system: -Uses a two-directional motor -May use a cable and pulley system -May use a spring-assist device to reduce the amount of current required to lower and raise a window -To operate a simple system, the wiring harness transmits a signal from the switch to the relay. A relay is used because the switches cannot handle the amount of current necessary to power the window. The relay sends current to the motor that powers the window. Most newer vehicles send the signal from the switch to a control module. The control module then signals a relay to power the motor to either raise or lower the window -Power Window System Parts – system parts commonly associated with a power window assembly include a: -motor -switch -relay -regulator -wiring harness -control module -fuse -Door Glass- -most newer vehicles use a cable-type regulator that mounts in the center of the glass. The glass is guided up and down by run channels at each end. The regulator is typically bolted to the door shell and the glass is attached in a variety of methods including: -rubber insulated clamps -Plastic clips -Ball and socket type connectors -bolts -Rivets -Some vehicles have express up and down features that require initialization if the battery is disconnected or the regulator is unplugged. These also have anti-pinch functions that can be checked following vehicle service information. Rear doors may have power sunshades that can be activated to block the sun for passengers -Vent and Sliding Glass – power vent glass is usually limited to quarter panel glass on vans or sport-utility vehicles (SUV). They use a window that is bolted in at the front with a flexible hinge and a motor at the rear. The motor is activated to move the rear part of the window out. Typically, these have a pinchweld-mounted weatherstrip in the window opening to seal the glass when closed. Power sliding rear windows in pickup trucks are a different type of powered glass. The center of the backglass opens via a motor and cable system. Motors may be available separately, but the cables usually need to be replaced with a complete backglass assembly -Sunroof Glass – a power sunroof assembly opens and closes using either a motor and worm gear system or a cable and pulley system. Both systems use a reversible, or bi-directional, motor. Some sunroofs slide open between the headliner and the roof panel. Other types open up and above the roof and slide back. They may also have a vent feature that only raises the rear of the sunroof for ventilation. Some sunroofs also have a powered sunshade. -Mechanical Inspection – -When inspecting the operation of power sunroof assemblies: -Look for the full range of travel -Verify the proper operation of the express feature -Verify proper operation of the vent open feature -If the glass panel is broken, a close inspection is necessary. Look for broken glass that may be stuck in the tracks or drive cables. Once all broken glass is cleaned up, cycle the sunroof through its full range of travel, looking for proper operation. If there was an airbag deployment, the sudden increase in cabin pressure may force the glass upward and break the sunroof guides. When installing the glass be sure it is adjusted to fit flush with the roof according to service manual specifications to avoid leaks or wind noise -Sunroof Timing – the timing of the drive motor and cables that move the glass panel in a sliding sunroof assembly is critical to the proper operation of the unit. The timing and automatic features may be set or adjusted by a variety of methods. Procedures used to initialize or adjust timing are typically vehicle-specific and may require a scan tool. Always reference vehicle-maker service information to identify proper service and adjustment procedures and any calibration or initialization requirements -Heated Glass – nearly all newer vehicles are equipped with heated glass systems. One example is the rear defroster, which typically uses a thin electrical element to warm the glass. When the switch is pressed, power is sent to the system control module which energizes a relay to power the defroster grid. Resistance in the grid heats to warm the glass. When the time cycle is complete, the relay is de-energized to open the circuit. A timer circuit is used to prevent battery drain and charging system failure. Most have a 10-minute cycle. Additional services that may use a heating element include: -A front facing, windshield-mounted camera -An adaptive cruise control radar module -Side mirrors -Heated Windshield – some vehicle makers use heated windshields which are made by laying a nearly invisible web of tungsten wires within the windshield glass. Heated windshields may also feature a heated wiper park area that resembles and works in conjunction with the backglass defroster. When the rear defroster switch is pressed, it typically also energizes the heated mirror system, if equipped. The defroster relay energizes the heated mirror grid. The computer-controlled timer controls both the heated mirror and defogger. Advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) that use a heated grid system typically work automatically. They use the data from the ambient temperature sensor to determine when to activate -Heated Glass Service Considerations – tests used to determine electrical problems with heated glass may include voltage or continuity. Voltage tests are typically done at the defroster grid terminals to confirm the appropriate voltage is reaching the defroster grid. Continuity checks are done to confirm there are no breaks in the defroster grid lines. Using a thermal imaging camera to view defroster grid operation is also a good way to detect issues with all or part of a grid not functioning. Repairs to the defroster grid system may include repairing: -Loose terminals with a conductive epoxy or solder -Small sections of damaged grid lines with a conductive paint -Glass-mounted antennas using a grid similar to a defroster may be repaired in a similar manner -Windshield Wiper System Features – windshield wiper systems include variable speeds with intermittent wipers and may include a wipe-after-wash feature. Other systems may use depressed park. This features engages the wiper motor so that it drops the wipers below the hood when they are not in use. -Wiper Operation- -When the wiper switch is activated -Current is sent to a control module which triggers a relay to send power to the wiper motor -The activated wiper motor rotates a spindle that is connected to the wiper linkages -Wiper systems only operate when the ignition switch is in the ON or ACC position -Rain-Sensing Wipers – -Rain-sensing wiper systems have a windshield-mounted infrared sensor. It is located on the interior side of the windshield in a housing near the base of the rearview mirror. The sensor is designed to detect rain on the windshield and activate the wipers when needed. Parts included in the rain-sensing wiper assembly include the: -Rain sensor -Wiper motor -Wiper control module -Wiper arm assemblies -Rain sensors use a clear gel pad between the sensor and windshield for proper operation. If the gel pad is damaged from the windshield replacement or sensor removal, it needs to be replaced. Some pads are replaceable, and some vehicle makers only offer them as part of the new sensor assembly -Rain-Sensing Wiper Operation – in general, the rain-sensing system operates like this: -the user sets the system to the desired sensitivity -the wiper switch is in one of the ON settings or on an automatic setting -the rain sensor sends an infrared beam of light towards the windshield -The infrared light reflects back off the outside surface of the windshield into a photo diode sensor -When rain or other precipitation is present, the light is deflected and less light makes it back to the photo diode -When the sensor module detects reduced light, a signal is sent to the wiper motor module to automatically start the wipers. -Always check the vehicle-maker service information for system description and operation Convenience Systems Operation and Service (3/4) Power Accessories – Seats and Doors -Seat System Features – -There are many options in seating systems including: -Heaters and coolers -Adjustable lumbar -Massage -Seat position memory systems -Advancements in seat technology are, for the most part, designed to increase comfort and reduce driver fatigue. One such technology is climate-controlled seats. These seats provide heat through electronically-controlled heating elements and ventilation through perforated seat covers. They may be integrated with the air conditioning system. The seats cannot heat and cool at the same time -Climate-Controlled Seating System Parts- -The serviceable climate-controlled seat system parts may include: -An air filter -cushion and backrest manifolds -cushion and backrest foam pads and seat covers -A heat/cool seat switch -Fuses -Ventilation ducts -Blowers -Heating elements -Some climate control seats use a blower fan combined with a Peltier, or thermos-electric device. This device can become hot or cold depending on the polarity. The fan then blows over it and up through the cushions of the seat -Lumbar Support and Massage – some seat systems use an air pump to inflate a bladder located inside the seat. An example of this is found in power lumbar systems. The lumber switch controls the lumbar air pump some seats use a manual adjustment knob to move built-in supports in the back of the seat to adjust lumbar support. Another type of lumbar support uses electric motors to adjust the support inside the seat back. These types may be adjustable up and down as well as the amount of lumber support. Air bladders and electric motors are also used for other seat functions including: -a massage function -vibration alerts -adjustable side bolsters -Power Seats and Memory Systems – power seats use switches, relays, sensors, and motors similar to other power accessories. There are many different power configurations for seats that determine the number of directions the seat can be moved and tilted. Some vehicles makers feature memory systems that allow drivers to store and quickly recall their desired seat positions with the push of a single button. In some vehicles, this memory feature may also store pedal, steering column, and outside mirror position preferences -Stowable Seats – some vehicles, such as minivans and SUVs, may have folding seats designed to be folded down and stowed or removed from the vehicle to create additional cargo space. In some cases, these seats may be power-operated and use switches, sensors, and motors much like standard power seats. Removal of a power folding seat may require the use of a scan tool for reinstallation. Always reference the service information as these seating systems may require calibration or initialization procedures. -Seat Removal Considerations – seats are mounted to the floor pan through the carpet. To access the seat-mounting hardware, adjustable seats may need to be in complete forward or rearward position. Refer to the vehicle-maker service information for proper removal procedures. Seats with a manual adjuster may require them to be placed in the full forward position to remove the rear-attaching hardware. If the seat is not in the forward position when removing the hardware, the seat track can spring forward causing personal injury. Never sit on the seat when the seat and track assembly are not installed. Some occupant classification systems use seat-track-mounted sensors and may require calibration if the vehicle has collision damage or the seat hardware was loosened. -Power Sliding Doors – when the OPEN switch is pressed, the power sliding door module sends a signal to the latch release actuator. Once the door is released by the latch actuator, the driver assembly actuator slides the door. The door latch switch or an optical sensor may help determine the position of the door and sends the information to the power sliding door modules. Depending on the vehicle, the driver motor may be located inside the sliding door or behind the quarter panel interior trim panel. Typically, there is either a cable system or a gear drive that mechanically opens and closes the door. -Operation by Motion Sensor – the hands-free access system only operates when the key fob is within range and only under specific conditions. Motion sensors are programmed to respond to a specific sequence of movement. In general, this is the user approaching the vehicle, and the foot kicking in and then out. This is to prevent the door from opening while the vehicle is in motion, or when animals, balls, or other objects pass near the sensor. As an additional safety feature, the key fob must be outside the vehicle. Once triggered, the sensors alert the control module, which sends a command to the electric motor to either open or close the door. -Power Sliding Door Parts – system parts commonly associated with a power sliding door assembly include: -A drive assembly actuator -A latch release actuator -A position sensor -Door switch plungers and pads -A flexible wire harness attached to the lower track roller assembly -A power sliding door latch switch -An ON/OFF switch for both doors -Liftgates and Decklids- -Liftgates, decklids, and even truck tailgates are available with convenience features. Optional features include: -Remote release -Power opening and closing -Hands-free operation -Integrated step assemblies -Additionally, some liftgates have an adjustable opening height to accommodate parking situations that have a low ceiling. This is accomplished by monitoring a liftgate position sensor. When the command to open or close is sent to the control module, the system will check the status of other systems such as the gear selector position and door ajar switches. If all parameters are met, the command to the latch and power motor is sent -Remote Operation – remote operation can be activated by: -A key fob button -An interior-mounted switch -An exterior switch on the gate -Motion sensors under the rear bumper -Anti-Pinch Safety Systems – anti-pinch safety systems may have sensors along the edge of a power door or gate. If the sensors detect an obstruction while closing, they send a message to the control module to reverse operation. Another type of system monitors the current draw of the power motor assembly to detect any resistance while opening or closing. If the resistance is detected, the motor reverse to avoid injury or damage -Motorized Latches – the latch assemblies on power doors, gates, and decklids have an actuator to release them when commanded open. To close, they usually have a motorized mechanism. This allows the panel to close slowly to the secondary step of the latch. The drawdown latch then pulls the panel all the way closed. -Power Door System Parts – the alignment of the door, strikers, hinges, rollers, tracks, and associated parts is critical for proper operation. If the body structure is out of alignment, it can affect power door operation. If a malfunction is detected in the power door assembly, you should scan for applicable DTCs. Also reference service information to understand the system and its operation. Parts that need to be checked include: -Power door position sensors -Motion sensors -Wire harnesses or connectors -The power motor assembly -The control module -Related system parts such as the gear selector position sensor -Initialization – power doors, gates, or decklids may need to be initialized to operate properly. Initialization may be required when disconnecting the battery or replacing a power door control module. Each make and model will differ on the procedures. Some may require a scan tool and others may require you to operate the closure panel through and entire open and close cycle Convenience Systems Operation and Service (4/4) Driver Information -Infotainment Systems – -Infotainment systems are available on most vehicles as standard or optional equipment. Infotainment system features may include: -GPS navigation -Satellite radio -Wi-Fi hotspot connectivity -Multi-zone audio/video control, which allows passengers to select individual audio/video programming -Climate control -The system may also provide access to a variety of other vehicle systems as well -Navigation Systems- -navigation systems receive signals from satellites to identify the vehicles position and direction by combining received data with information obtained from an onboard computer with various sensors. The GPS transmits geolocation and time information, which is received by a GPS receiver located in the vehicles navigation system. Navigation systems also: -Calculate travel distance -Display maps on the navigation system screen -Check GPS and sensor information against a map database -Depending on the system, other features such as weather data or points of interest may be display as well -Navigation System Parts – navigation system parts commonly include: -A GPS or satellite antenna. These may also be known as a shark-fin antenna on the roof. However, the actual GPS antenna may be located somewhere else in the vehicle. -Wheel speed and other dynamic sensors to track the vehicles movement if the GPS signal is temporarily lost -A display which is commonly a touch screen -A navigation computer -Coaxial cables -Antenna Service Considerations – when servicing a GPS or satellite antenna, considerations need to be made for removal depending on where it is located. It may require accessing the backside of the panel to which it is mounted. Antennas located on the roof typically require removing or repositioning the headliner to access the mounting fastener and antenna wiring. Most roof-mounted satellite antennas are fastened with a bolted retainer. There are some that are bonded to the roof with urethane adhesive making removal difficult. The GPS antenna may be located under the top surface of the dash or another location with clear view of the sky. Occasionally, the system may not immediately recognize the correct location of the vehicle and require moving it outdoors away from power lines or other sources of interference -Audio- -The audio system works with the infotainment system to: -Play music -Make phone calls -Give voice commands -Most audio systems include speaks and a microphone for use with voice commands and other communication options -Driver Information Center- -Many vehicles have a driver information center in the instrument panel. Drivers have options to control and customize the look and information it displays. This may even include the look and style of the gauges. In addition to speed, RPM, and engine data, information displayed may include: -Warnings and malfunction indicator lamp (MIL) alerts -Lane keep assist -Adaptive cruise control -Performance data -Performance data can include average gas mileage, trip timers, and odometers. Hybrid and electric vehicles may show how much battery life is left or when the regenerative brakes are charging the battery. The information center, along with steering wheel buttons, may be used to access menus to select vehicle options -Head-up Display – a head-up display shows vehicle speed and driver assistance information on the windshield. an image is projected and reflected on the windshield within the drivers line of sight. Essential information can be featured on the head-up display with the intent to keep the drivers attention on the road ahead. Every vehicle is different, some head-up displays may display ADAS related information and navigation directions. Use vehicle-maker service information and the correct windshield glass when servicing a vehicle with a head-up display. Some service information may abbreviate head-up display as HUD -Head-Up Display Service - -Calibration of the head-up display may be required if any of the following parts are removed and reinstalled or replaced: -The head-up display -The windshield -The dash assembly -A scan tool and targets may be needed when calibrating a head-up display. Be sure to follow vehicle-maker service information Damage Analysis of Convenience Systems Keyless Entry Systems -Keyless Entry System – a keyless entry system controls access to the vehicle without using a traditional mechanical key. These systems typically use an electronic control module to activate motors that control the vehicle locks. Keyless entry can be divided into two categories, active and passive. -Active Keyless Entry – active keyless entry is the traditional keyless entry where a key fob is pressed to unlock the doors or trunk, or to start the engine -Passive Keyless Entry – passive keyless allows the vehicle entry without pushing buttons on a key fob. Simply carrying a pass key will unlock the door and start the engine with a push button. This system may also be part of the vehicle push-button starting system -Passive Keyless Entry Operation – a passive entry system does not require the user to push a button. Instead, the system uses a transmitter in the key fob and multiple, low-frequency antennas inside and outside of the vehicle. When the transmitter is within range, the antennas receive signals from the keyless entry transmitter, allowing various features to operate. For example, the doors may unlock when a front outside door handle is gripped. If the driver door is gripped, only the driver door will unlock. If the passenger door is gripped, all doors unlocked. -red = exterior antenna range -yellow = interior antenna range -Passive Keyless Entry Parts – common parts of a passive keyless entry system include: -Keyless entry transmitters -Antennas (located throughout the interior to cover the entire vehicle) -An exterior antenna -Control modules -Exterior lighting (if equipped) -Push-Button Start – vehicles with passive keyless entry may be equipped with a push-button start feature. In order to use the push-button start: -1) Be sure the key fob is inside the vehicle -2) Depress the brake pedal -3) Push the start button -4) The vehicle power management receives a signal from the control module that the proper key is in the vehicle -5) Engine starts -Keyless Entry Innovations – some vehicle makers may offer an optional key that allows special parameters to be set for the vehicle while in use. This may be desirable when the vehicle will be operated by a family teenager or fleet operator. The key: -Has a built-in microchip that gives special instructions to the vehicle -Can be switched to limit the top speed of the vehicle -Limits the audio volume of the sound system -Encourages seat belt us with a chiming pattern and muting of the sound system -Includes additional features, such as an earlier low-fuel warning and speed alert chime -Parts Susceptible to Collision Damage – key parts susceptible to collision damage may include the: -Electronic control module -Junction box -Wireless door lock buzzer -Door and handles -Note: all of the electrical parts are generally located under the hood, on the driver side, by the strut tower. However, the system is tied into the power door locks, switches, exterior and interior electrical key oscillators (which receive request signals from the electronic control unit (ECU) and create an actuation area around the doors or the vehicle interior), etc. These can also be damaged in a collision, and typically require a scan tool and service information to diagnose malfunctioning parts. -Diagnostic Procedure – when analyzing damage to the passive keyless entry system, verify that the keyless entry system works. If there are problems with the push-button start feature, a malfunction code may be stored in the power management control module or an indicator lamp on the start button may flash when a fault is detected, if the vehicle is equipped. In either case, you should investigate further to determine what repairs are necessary. Use of a symptoms table may be useful in the diagnosis of any non-operation. Diagnosis may require a scan tool, additionally a scan tool may be used for calibration following repairs. Theft-Deterrent Systems -Theft-Deterrent Systems – the typical theft-deterrent system is designed to sound an alarm and/or flash the exterior lights during forced entry. These theft-deterrent systems have been improved over the years to include more advanced electronics to detect intrusion and limit theft -Types – there are three common types of theft-deterrent systems: -Telematics subscription service -Listening devices -Engine immobilizers -Note: A telematics subscription service that has a Stolen Vehicle Slowdown feature allows the service provider to slow down, stop, and recover stolen vehicles that might be involved in a high-speed chase. This feature is in addition to features that use GPS technology to locate lost or stolen vehicles. -Parts – parts that make up a theft-deterrent system include: -Door lock control system parts -A control module -A security horn, which may be powered independent of the battery -A security indicator lamp -Door, hood, trunk ajar switches -A glass breakage sensor and a glass breakage sensor ECU, if equipped -Operation – the theft-deterrent system operates when the doors are locked, either manually or remotely. The system monitors movement, noise, latches, and/or vehicle movement, and sets off an alarm when specific criteria are met. On some systems, the switches are checked three times per second to make sure switches are closed. These systems may also have a movement sensor that detects movement inside the vehicle. This particular system requires windows to be closed for proper operation. Some systems have a heartbeat sensor. The heartbeat sensor is used to detect the presence of someone inside the vehicle, with an indicator on the key fob. -Common System Faults – the use of a scan tool may be required to diagnose theft-deterrent system faults. Common faults may include the: -System not arming -Alarm not sounding and/or the proper lights not flashing -System arming when the doors/lids are open -Replacement Considerations – during damage analysis, note that the horns are most susceptible to damage and that most theft-deterrent system parts are integrated with other systems Rain Sensing Wipers System -Rain Sensing Wipers – a popular option, especially in rainy areas, is rain sensing wipers. Rain sensing wipers are designed to detect moisture on the windshield and auto-start the wipers when on. Contrary to the name, it is not the wipers that sense rain on the windshield, but rather it is an infrared sensor module. The sensor module is mounted on the interior side of the windshield, in a housing either next to, or part of, the base of the rearview mirror. The module connector is also usually in the same housing. -Parts – parts included in the rain sensing wiper assembly include the: -Wiper assembly (blades, linkage, etc.) -Wiper motor -Rain sensor -Junction boxes -Wiper motor module -Operation – always check the maker’s service information for the specific system operation. In general, the rain sensing system operates like this: -With rain sensing wiper systems, the user sets the system to the desired sensitivity -The wiper switch is on one of the ON settings, or on an automatic setting -The rain sensor sends an infrared beam of light toward the cabin side of the windshield and the light reflects back into a photo diode sensor -When rain is present, the light is deflected and less light makes it back to the photo diode -When the sensor module detects reduced light, a signal is sent to the wiper motor module to automatically start the wipers -Damage Analysis – the presence of a housing next to the rearview mirror with an electrical connection, or a flat sensor pressed against the glass on the front side of the mirror are indications that the vehicle is equipped with a rain sensor. When checking for damage, look for cracks or damage to the windshield near the sensor module that would affect its operation. In addition, check the housing and the electrical connection. Initial troubleshooting described by some vehicle makers is as simple as applying water to the windshield. -Replacement Considerations – typically, a special windshield and system calibration are not required. The sensor is generally adhered with special tape that is supplied with the part Climate-Controlled Seats System -Climate-Controlled Seats – advancements in seat technology are mostly designed to increase comfort and reduce driver fatigue. One such technology is climate-controlled seats. Climate-controlled seats: -Provide heat and ventilation -May be tied into the HVAC system -Cannot heat and cool at the same time -Climate-Controlled Seat Operation – heated and cooled seat operation includes switches located on the instrument panel, center console, or door panels, and seat temperature monitored by the seat module -Seat Heaters/Coolers – some vehicles have a climate-controlled seat system that uses seat heaters to provide heat and ventilation (blower units) to provide cooling. The cooling system uses interior ambient air, rather than air from the A/C unit. Similarly, the heat function does not use heated air. The climate-controlled seat system seat heaters have adjustable temperature areas and fixed temperature areas. Adjustable Temperature areas are used for the shoulder and lumbar areas and the area of the thighs and knees that easily become cold. -HVAC Temperature Control – other vehicles may use a thermo-electric device to heat or cool the air supply. The climate-controlled seat system is able to heat and cool the front seats. Each climate-controlled seat is operated by push buttons on the HVAC module located on the instrument panel. Each front seat temperature is then monitored and controlled by the dual climate-controlled seat module located on the passenger front seat track -Climate-Controlled Seat Parts – the serviceable climate-controlled seat system parts may include: -An air filter -Cushion and backrest manifolds -Cushion and backrest foam pads and trim covers -A heat/cool seat switch -Fuses -Ventilation ducts -Blowers -Damage Analysis – diagnosing issues with the operation of the climate-controlled seats requires several tools, such as wrenches, screwdrivers, and a scan tool. Use a scan tool to check problems that may set DTCs. Check for signs of obvious physical damage, such as torn seat covers, damaged seat frames, or punctures in the seat cushions. Reference the vehicle maker diagnostic charts, when available, to diagnose the problem Hands-Free Access Systems -Hands-Free Access System – the hands-free access system allows the user to open doors or the tailgate of the vehicle by waving a foot under a sensor, provided the key fob is within the sensor range -Hands-Free Access System Parts – common hands-free access system parts include the following: -Keyfob -Motion sensors -Controller module -Electric motor -Pinch sensors -Note: Depending on the vehicle maker design, the motion sensors may be located in different locations under the vehicle. -Hands-Free Access System Operation – the hands-free access system only operates when the keyfob is within range and only under specific conditions. In order to prevent the liftgate from opening while the vehicle is in motion, or when animals, balls, etc. pass near the sensor, the motion sensors are programmed to respond to a specific sequence of movement. In general, this is the user approaching the vehicle, and the foot kicking in and then out. As an additional safety feature, the keyfob must be outside the vehicle. Once triggered, the sensors alert the control module, which sends a command to the electric motor to either open or close -Hands-Free Access System Damage Analysis – any collision damage to areas near the sensors is likely to result in damage to motion sensors or require calibration of the motion sensors. Always refer to vehicle maker service information to identify sensor location, type, and service requirements. Damage Analysis of Brake Systems (1/2) Basic Brake System Operation -Basic Brake System Overview – a vehicle in motion has kinetic energy. A brake system applies friction at each wheel to slow down or stop vehicle motion. The friction turns kinetic energy into heat, which is absorbed and dissipated in the brake system parts. Service brake systems use hydraulic pressure to slow or stop wheel movement. Hydraulic fluid is used because it does not compress. Therefore, when pressure is exerted on the fluid, it is transmitted equally in all directions in the system, regardless of distance. A typical basic brake system is made up of the following parts: -Brake rotor -Brake drum -Brake caliper -Wheel cylinder -Master cylinder -Lines and hoses -Brake fluid -Brake fluid reservoir -Disc Brake Assembly – -Key parts of a disc brake assembly include the: -Caliper assembly and disc brake pads -Rotor and splash shield -Caliper Assembly – -The caliper assembly is bolted to the spindle assembly and contains the: -Caliper piston(s) -Caliper piston seal -Caliper piston dust boot -Bleeder screw -Hardware used with the caliper assembly includes the: -Spring clip, which holds the inboard pad to the piston -Caliper bushings, which allow movement along the anchoring bolts -Anti-squeal shims -Note: Do not apply brakes with the caliper or rotor removed -Disc Brake Pads -Have lining material riveted or bonded to the backing plates -May contain asbestos -Can be semi-metallic -Wear with use and should be inspected if parts are removed for collision repairs -Rotor and Splash Shield -A rotor may: -Be attached to the wheel spindle -Have vents for cooling -Be placed over the studs on the wheel hub -Be held in place by the road wheel or secured with screws to the hub assembly -A splash shield: -Is bolted to the steering knuckle on the front brakes -Minimizes water, dirt, and dust from accumulating on the brake assembly -May be designed to direct air flow to help cool the brakes -Drum Brake Assemblies – include the drum, backing plate, wheel cylinder, brake shoes, springs and hardware, and automatic mechanical (star wheel) adjuster. -Backing Plate – is bolted to the axle. This part is a fixture for attaching other brake parts -Brake Drum – -Encloses the brake mechanical parts -Fits over the wheel studs -Is held in place by hub bearings, retaining screws, or a road wheel -May have fins for cooling -May be aluminum with a steel or iron friction surface insert -Brake Shoe Linings – -Are either riveted or bonded to a metal shoe -May contain asbestos -May contain metallic particles to increase stopping power -Have a stamped and reinforced steel backing for attaching other brake hardware -Are often designed to be mounted facing forward for the leading shoe or rearward for the trailing shoe -Mechanical (Star Wheel) Adjuster – the star wheel adjuster has left-hand threads on one side of the vehicle and right-hand threads for the other side. Do not switch these adjusters from side to side or the rear brake will end up out of adjustment and the driver will experience a sinking pedal -Springs and Hardware – types of springs and hardware used in a drum brake system include: -Return springs, used to bring the shoes back into position after braking and release hydraulic pressure -Shoe hold-down springs, used to mount the shoes to the backing plate. These hold the shoes in place while still allowing some movement -A shoe anchor pin, which is attached to the backing plate, and is used to transfer the braking torque from the shoes to the backing plate -The parking brake actuator lever works with the parking brake cable to push the brake shoes against the brake drum when the parking brake is applied -Wheel Cylinder – the wheel cylinder is attached to the backing plate with bolts or clips and forces the brake shoes outward against the drum. The wheel cylinder is similar to the caliper pistons on a disc brake system Brake System Parts -Master Cylinder Description – Parts of a master cylinder include: -The reservoir, which supplies the master cylinder with fluid. Some systems have a remote reservoir that uses a low-pressure supply line to supply fluid to the master cylinder -The pushrod, which connects the brake pedal and power assist -Primary and secondary pistons, which force pressure into the brake lines -Note: As the piston is moved by the brake pedal pushrod, the brake fluid forward of the piston seals is forced into the brake lines, raising the pressure in the lines. Vehicles are built with multi-circuit braking systems. These systems have front and rear, or diagonally separated, brake systems to ensure partial braking is retained in case of a brake line failure. -Brake System Operation – pressure is created in the brake system by applying pressure to the brake pedal. This creates hydraulic pressure in the master cylinder by forcing the piston against the fluid. The master cylinder creates hydraulic pressure in the brake lines. The brake lines carry hydraulic pressure to the wheel cylinders and calipers, which change hydraulic pressure into motion. The piston in the caliper or wheel cylinder moves outward as a result of the hydraulic pressure. This stops the vehicle by forcing the friction material against the rotor or drum. Note: Modern vehicles with anti-lock brakes will not use a proportioning valve. The distribution of brake pressure to each wheel will be controlled by the anti-lock brake system. -Brake Assist Systems – vacuum and hydraulic are two common automotive brake assist systems. Vacuum assist brakes have a vacuum assist that contains a diaphragm. Vacuum assist brakes apply vacuum to one side of the diaphragm and atmospheric pressure to the other. Vacuum is obtained from the engine intake manifold. They may require an additional vacuum pump to supply adequate vacuum on some engines. Some vehicles use hydraulic power, instead of vacuum, to assist in the application of the brakes. This is typically done where engine vacuum is a concern, such as diesel engines, or vans where available space is a concern. Vehicles with an integral anti-lock brake system (ABS) use brake fluid under pressure to assist in the application of the brakes. -Assisted Emergency Braking – some vehicles have an assisted emergency braking system. This system recognizes an emergency braking situation by measuring the rate of the brake pedal being depressed and comparing it to normal brake pedal movement. The system then automatically applies full braking force to help decrease stopping distances. When the driver pushes the brake pedal much quicker than normal, signaling an emergency, the computer applies an electronic valve on the power assist system for full braking. At the same time, the ABS is engaged to prevent wheel lock up. -Parking Brakes – parking brakes apply brake pressure to the rear wheels using a foot-actuated floor pedal or hand lever. Brake pressure is typically applied using a mechanical cable attaching the pedal or lever to the rear brakes. -Drum Parking Brakes – the drum parking brake is actuated by the parking brake lever or pedal, mechanically forcing both shoes outward against the brake drum. Return springs pull the shoes away from contacting the drum after the pedal or lever is released. -Electronic Parking Brakes – there are two basic designs for electronic parking brake systems. The first design still uses cables to actuate the parking brakes. Cables from the wheels attach to a motor that pulls and releases similarly to the way a manual lever pulls and releases. The second design uses actuators attached directly to the rear calipers. In this case, a signal controller will relay power to the motors to clamp the brake pads against the rotors. In most cases, this type of system will have a switch to activate the parking brake, but some systems activate the parking brakes when the transmission is shifted into park. Note: On some vehicles with caliper-mounted motors, the electronic parking brake can double as a hill-hold for vehicles with manual transmissions. -Drum-In-Hat Parking Brakes – drum-in-hat parking brakes have separate regular and parking brake systems. These parking brakes actuate the regular brakes hydraulically and the parking brake mechanically. Drum-in-hat parking brakes actuate the parking brake by mechanically. Drum-in-hat parking brakes actuate the parking brake by mechanically operating a small drum brake just outside of the hub and inside the rotor. -Brake Line Ends – the brake lines and hoses transmit fluid pressure from the master cylinder to the calipers or wheel cylinders. Brake line ends may be ISO flare fittings or double flare fittings, which are typically found on older model vehicles. Brake lines are made of double-wall steel and must be carefully formed and routed to avoid creating fluid restrictions. Brake hoses connect rigid brake lines to moveable parts, and they are flexible to allow movement with the wheel and suspension system Brake Fluid -Types of Brake Fluid – common brake fluid types include DOT 3, DOT 4, and DOT 5. Note: do not allow brake fluid to come in contact with painted surfaces. If this happens, wash the area thoroughly with water -DOT 3 Brake Fluid – DOT 3 brake fluid is non-petroleum based, but has additives that aid internal system lubrication and prevent corrosion. It maintains its viscosity in high temperatures. DOT 3 brake fluid should not be stored after a container is opened and is designed to absorb moisture. Moisture in a braking system can vaporize, creating air in the system and lowering the brake fluid boiling point. This process can cause corrosion on brake system parts -DOT 4 Brake fluid – - has a higher boiling point than DOT 3. -Can be mixed with DOT 3. -Absorbs more moisture than DOT 3 -DOT 5 Brake Fluid – -Is silicone-based -Does not absorb moisture -Compresses more than DOT 3 or DOT 4 -Is not compatible with DOT 3 or DOT 4. Do not mix -Is used and recommended by only a few vehicle makers -Is purple in color Damage Analysis of Brake Systems (2/2) Disc Brakes -Basic Brake System Inspection – when inspecting the brake system for damage, be sure to inspect all brake system components including the brake rotors, drums, master cylinder, booster, hoses, lines, and parking brake system. It is important to inspect the braking system closely to identify collision-related damage vs maintenance items. If brake system issues are identified that do not appear to be collision-related, these items must be fully documented and reviewed with the customer. If the customer elects to not have these required services performed, the final documents signed by the vehicle owner should include a summary of the necessary repairs and the customer’s decision to not complete the recommended repairs. Note: Leaking break fluid indicates damage to the brake system. Trace the leak to its source to locate the damaged part. -Brake System Inspection, continued – it is always important to include inspection of the brake pedal and fasteners as part of your brake system inspection. Some vehicles may be equipped with a safety feature that allows the brake pedal to drop away in a collision situation. This creates additional space and reduces potential impact to the driver’s legs. -Collision Damage to Disc Brakes – collision damage to the caliper assembly may include bends, shifted slides, torn seals, or broken mounts. Damage to disc brake pads may include contamination, cracks, bends, or delamination. Damage to fasteners and other hardware may cause them to be bent or broken. Damage or wear to the caliper assembly can cause a number of problems. These include: -Pulling during braking -Fluid leaks -A soft pedal -Dragging -Brake failure -Moisture Contamination – an open brake system will absorb moisture. The amount of moisture absorbed into the system depends on the humidity level and the length of time the system is open. A refractive, electronic tester, or paper test strips can be used to determine if the brake fluid is contaminated. A system that has been open for an extended period should be tested for moisture. Moisture greatly reduces the boiling point of brake fluid. Absorption of even 4 percent moisture can reduce the boiling point 50 percent. Heat can cause water in the brake fluid to change from a liquid to a gas. When this occurs, the brake pedal stroke is used up, compressing the gas. This condition could go unnoticed since the water vapor returns to a liquid as the system cools. Note: A contaminated system should be flushed -Rotor – when inspecting brake rotors, check for: -Bent mounting areas -Cracks and scoring -Glazing or corrosion -Improper thickness -Note: Inspect rotors for hardware and fastener damage or warpage. Warpage of brake rotors is measured by lateral runout measurements. Runout can be identified by making measurements with dial indicators. Improper tightening of the wheel fasteners can cause brake rotors to warp -Inspecting and Resurfacing Rotors – a damaged rotor can cause a vehicle to shake during braking. This symptom can be caused by the rotor being cracked across the surface, cracked down the center of the cooling fins, warped from cooling too quickly or uneven cooling, and bent from collision damage. Rotor surfaces may also become scored from brake pads that have been worn to their backing plates or pitted from corrosion. This type of damage, depending on the depth, can normally be removed by resurfacing. Note: Petroleum product of brake fluid rotor contamination can cause a number of problems-including those similar to a damaged rotor. -Initial Inspection Areas – all areas of the disc brake system should be inspected. To inspect a brake rotor: -1) Remove the wheel -2) Check both the inside and outside of rotor surfaces -3) Inspect for cracks -4) Inspect for black or blue discoloration, which indicates excessive heat -5) Inspect for scores, pitting, or grooves in the surface -6) Check for runout (warped rotors) with a dial indicator -Note: Rotors with slight surface defects or runout can be resurfaced on a brake lathe, depending on the severity of the defect. Follow the vehicle maker’s recommendations for minimum thickness and runout tolerances -Rear Disc Brakes – rear disc brakes have: -Similar hardware, operation, and inspection requirements as front disc brakes -Different parking brake systems, depending on the vehicle make and model -Brake Pads – when inspecting the brake system, the condition of the friction material should be checked. When parts must be replaced, the replacement alternatives must be carefully considered. -Brake Lining Replacement – brake pad replacement considerations include the amount of material remaining on the pad. Each vehicle maker will have recommendations indicating when brake material should be replaced. Depending on whether the friction material is riveted or bonded affects when the brake material is replaced. When inspecting brake material thickness, a part with riveted brake material will require replacement when more material is remaining as compared to bonded brake material. This is because the attaching rivets will contact the rotor before the pad will wear away. Check the condition of the brake lining. Look for signs of contamination, cracks, or deterioration. -Inspecting Other Brake Hardware – -Check other brake hardware for: -Broken holding clips -Damaged, missing, or corroded attaching bolts -Dry caliper bushings -Check Splash shield for: -Bends or cracks -Excessive dirt and debris -Note: Check wheel mating surfaces for damage or debris – if unaddressed, vibrations and/or braking system issues may arise. -Replacement Part Options – when servicing brakes, it is important to use parts recommended by the vehicle maker. Using pads that are not recommended may cause a vehicle to brake differently than designed. Special pads with electronic wear sensors are required for vehicles that electronically monitor friction material wear. These pads use a wire in the friction material that creates an open in the circuit as the pads wear. When an open occurs, the driver is notified that it is time for replacement. -Collision Damage to Master Cylinders – collision damage to the master cylinder can be difficult to detect. When inspecting the master cylinder for damage, common types of damage may include: -Broken lines -Detached reservoirs -Damaged housings -Dirt contamination -Damage to the body mounting locations or cowl panel Drum Brakes -Collision Damage to Drum Brakes - collision damage to drum brakes may include: -Twisted, cracked, or out-of-round drums -Bent shoes -Contaminated or missing friction material -Broken or stretched springs -Bent hardware -Leaking or cracked wheel cylinders -Damage to backing plates -Inspecting Drum Brakes – -symptoms of worn or damaged drums include: -A vibrating brake pedal, indicating a possible out of round condition -A low pedal where the adjuster is frozen due to corrosion or collision damage -Grabbing or overly sensitive brakes, indicating possible contaminated friction material -Abnormal noises -Pull or drag -The parking brake is not operating properly -Note: If there is suspected damage, remove the brake drum for inspection of all brake parts. -Checking the Drum and Backing Plate – -Check the drum for: -Cracks around the lug nut holes -Cracks in the friction surface -Black or blue discoloration that shows excessive heat -Scores or grooves in the surface -A wear pattern, which may indicate uneven shoe contact -Note: If a brake drum is cracked, it must be replaced. Minor scratches or grooves and minor discoloration of signs of overheating can be repaired by resurfacing. -Check the backing plate for: -Bends in the plate -Proper parts attachment -A leaking wheel cylinder -A leaking axle seal -The condition of the hardware -Checking the Brake Linings and Wheel Cylinder - -The brake linings should be checked for: -Even lining wear pattern -Lining thickness -Broken or missing lining sections -Cracks in linings -Reversed (leading and trailing) linings -The wheel cylinder should be checked for: -Proper contact with shoes -Leaks behind the seals -Checking the Springs and Hardware - -Check the springs and hardware for: -Damage -Stretched springs -Parts that are out of position -Check the adjusting mechanism for: -Correct positioning -Proper movement -Excessively corroded threads -A binding adjustment lever -Check the parking brake lever for: -Ease of movement -Correct positioning -An attached cable -Effectiveness Braking Assists -Collision Damage to Power Assists – collision damage to power assists includes: -Hydraulic leaks -Vacuum leaks -Visible damage to the unit -Possible internal damage -Note: When repairing collision-damaged brake systems, assist units are usually not repaired, they are replaced when damaged. Upon installation, be sure to properly adjust the pushrod, or improper braking may result. When installing a brake booster, be sure to refer to vehicle maker service procedures and requirements to ensure the pushrod is properly adjusted to avoid improper braking -Left is power steering pump, right is hydraulic boost -Damaged Power Assists – hard pedal can be described as excessive pressure required to stop a vehicle. Hard pedal can be caused by collision damage to power assists. While the engine is running, inspect the brake system for brake pedal feel. If the pedal feels too hard, it may indicate a booster that is not working or has a vacuum leak. Additional symptoms of damage to power assist units may include: -A hissing noise -Sensitive brakes -A slow releasing pedal -Pedal chatter -Incorrect engine idle (vacuum leak) Brake Lines and Hoses -Brake Warning Light – a warning light on the dash will likely illuminate if the hydraulic system has low fluid levels after a brake line has broken -Leaking Brake Lines and Hoses – a vehicle with a firm, but sinking pedal may have a leak in one of the brake lines or hoses. Depending on its location, a leak may contaminate the friction material. If the leak is large enough, the brake pedal could go to the floor, losing at least 50 percent of its braking action. Brake lines may be kinked or broken during a collision. If a brake line is damaged, it must be replaced. The line must be routed in its original factory. Use all the original style clips and fasteners to position the brake lines. Do not straighten kinked lines. Be sure the lines are positioned away from exhaust heat and suspension movement. -Constricted Brake Lines – a vehicle that pulls to one side while braking may have a partially blocked brake line, which restricts fluid flow. This can be caused by a dent, bend, or internal blockage in a brake line. In many cases, the master cylinder and assist will provide enough pressure to force the brake fluid past the obstruction to apply the brakes. However, the fluid pressure may not be able to release due to the obstruction once the brakes are released. This would result in a constant pressure to the caliper or wheel cylinder and cause a dragging brake. Brake drag is easiest to diagnose and most noticeable in slippery conditions. This condition may also be noticeable on dry pavement as an intermittent pull immediately after the brakes are released -Top is no damage. Bottom is damage. Parking Brakes -Inspecting Parking Brakes – the parking brake pedal/lever and cables should be inspected for wear or damage. A parking brake that is worn or damaged often will not hold a vehicle stationary when parked on an incline. Cable adjustment may be required to determine if damage is present. -When inspecting the parking brake pedal or lever, verify the parking brake: -Engages easily -Holds the brake in place -Releases easily -Does not bind -Brake drag may also be a symptom of a faulty parking brake system. This can be caused by: -Damaged or corroded brake parts -A bent, collapsed, or corroded parking brake cable -Bent or corroded parking brake pivots or brackets Damage Analysis of Electronic Brake Systems (1/2) ABS Operation -Anti-Lock Brake Systems Purpose – modern vehicles have a variety of safety features that help the driver maintain control of the vehicle in a variety of situations. Traction control, stability control, and other related features are enhancements to the ABS, that provide additional programming, sensors, and networking of systems. The ABS can release and re-apply brake fluid pressure rapidly to provide brake control to axles or individual wheels. This control of brake fluid pressure is called modulation, which helps the driver maintain steering control during hard braking events. It also reduces hydroplaning during braking and flat-spotting of tires during panic stops. Note: The ABS, and enhanced features provide greater braking control to the axles and individual wheels. -Basic ABS Operation – an ABS monitors wheel speed during braking; if a wheel begins to lock up, the electronic control module (ECM) sends a signal to hydraulic valves in the system that reduce braking pressure to that wheel. When the wheel starts turning again, brake pressure is reapplied. This happens many times per second and produces an action similar to manually pumping the brakes, only much faster -Brake Lockup – brake lockup occurs when the brakes stop the wheel and tire assembly, but not the vehicle. Friction from the brake surfaces exceed the friction of the tire to the road surface. This causes the tire to slip across the road surface, resulting in increased stopping distance and reduced steering control -ABS Types – you should be aware that there are a few different ABS types -Top to bottom – Four-Channel, Four-Wheel Three-Channel, Rear-Wheel -Four-Channel – a four-channel ABS can control each wheel individually and provides the best straight-line stability and steering control. Each wheel has a speed sensor providing information to the ECM, which can apply, hold, or release the brakes as needed -Wheel Speed Sensor – in each corner -Four-Wheel Three-Channel – a four-wheel, three-channel ABS can control the front wheel brakes individually and the rear wheels together as an axle. This system has two front wheel speed sensors and usually only one rear speed sensor. Three-Channel systems are more common on solid rear axle vehicles, such as pickup trucks, and they also provide straight-line stability and steering control -Rear – Wheel Speed Sensor (typically located in the different) -Front – Wheel Speed Sensor in each -Rear-Wheel – a rear-wheel ABS regulates pressure equally to the rear wheels only and uses one rear speed sensor. The rear speed sensor is mounted in the transmission, differential housing, or the transfer case. A rear-wheel ABS is designed to improve straight-line stability in panic stops, but does not prevent the loss vehicle steering during front wheel lockup. These systems are not as common on modern vehicles, but may be found on some pickup trucks and vans. A rear-wheel ABS can help reduce the effects of varying load and weight transfer on trucks and vans -Wheel Speed Sensor in rear ABS Parts -An ABS is made up of several parts -Accumulator (if present) – ABS with an accumulator, will store hydraulic fluid under pressure -Diagnostic Connectors – diagnostic connectors are points where test equipment connections are made -Modulator Valves (Sometimes known as ABS Valves), Fluid Pump, Relays, and Pressure Switches – modulator valves, sometimes known as ABS valves, control the flow of fluid in the brake system -Wheel Speed Sensors and Tone Rings – wheel speed sensors, and tone rings create a signal used by the ECM to determine wheel speed -Warning Lamps – warning lamps inform the driver of problems in the brake system or ABS -ECM Functions – when the vehicle is first started, the ECM checks the operation of its own circuits and performs a self-test of the ABS electrical parts and circuits to determine if there are any faults. When the vehicle is put into motion, there may be additional tests for wheel speed signals, pump motors, and/or modulator valves, which may be activated. The ECM also communicates with other onboard systems, stores diagnostic trouble codes, and commands the operation of the ABS warning lamp. If problems are detected, the ECM will shut down ABS operation and cause the ABS warning lamp to remain lit. normal braking is typically available without ABS operation. Other names used for an ABS ECM include: -Electronic control unit (ECU) -Electronic brake control module (EBCM) -Anti-lock brake controller -Non-Integral and Integral ABS – anti-lock braking systems area classified in two general categories, non-integral and integral. -Non-Integral – a non-integral ABS utilizes a conventional brake master cylinder, power assist assembly, and a separate hydraulic modulator unit with a pump motor. Some anti-lock brake systems may also use a separate fluid pump -Integral – an integral ABS can be identified by a special hydraulic unit located at the master cylinder. Integral systems typically package the anti-lock valves, pump motor, accumulator, and other system parts together with the master cylinder Traction Control Parts and Function -Traction Control Systems (TCS) Function – a TCS is designed to prevent the loss of traction of driven wheels, limiting spinning drive wheels during acceleration. TCS is activated when throttle input and engine torque exceed the drive wheel road surface traction conditions. -TCS and ABS parts – TCS utilize many ABS parts. Signals received from the wheel speed sensors are used to identify which wheel or wheels are spinning too fast. The information is used by the ECM in a different program to aid in acceleration (traction control) instead of deceleration (anti-lock braking) -Torque Reduction – during acceleration, if a drive wheel is detected to be spinning faster than the vehicle is accelerating, the traction control system will send a request to the powertrain control module to reduce engine torque output. If torque reduction is not effective in bringing the slipping wheels under control, the ECM will apply brake pressure to the spinning drive wheels until traction is regained -TCS for All-Wheel Drive – TCS for all-wheel-drive vehicles uses the slowest turning wheel speed information, and limits the other drive wheels from turning within 20 percent of that speed or faster. The exact logic of how each of these systems works will vary from vehicle maker to vehicle maker, but the general principles remain the same -Traction Control Deactivation – the driver may switch off the TCS if desired. Once deactived, the system will remain off until the next ignition cycle, or until it is turned back on by the driver. When deactivated by the driver, the TCS will display a “TRACTION OFF” message on the instrument panel or on the center console warning lamp. The message or lamp will remain lit until the system is returned to operation. Stability Control System Parts and Functions -Stability Control Systems – the stability control system helps maintain control of the vehicle during extreme steering maneuvers when the vehicle nears or exceeds the limits of road traction and may experience loss of control. This is accomplished by monitoring data from sensors that report what the vehicle is doing and comparing it to what the driver inputs indicate the vehicle should be doing -Stability Control Parts – the stability control system relies on the ABS and its parts to apply brakes strategically. It also communicates with the PCM to limit torque, and may network with other systems as well. To determine if the vehicle is under control or not, sensors provide input to the ECM -Yaw Rate Sensors – yaw rate sensors measure a vehicle’s actual turn rate, or change in direction, and report the information to the ECM. These sensors are usually located in the passenger compartment and may be under the rear package shelf, in the center console, or under the driver’s or passenger’s seat -Steering Angle Sensor – the steering angle sensor provides the ECM with information about the driver’s steering wheel movements, and measures the steering wheel position relative to straight ahead. Some models also measure the rate (speed) that the steering wheel turns. It may be self-centering or have to be calibrated after any steering, suspension, or unitized structure / frame straightening work is performed, or the sensor is serviced -Lateral Accelerometer – the lateral accelerometer sends a precise reading to the ECM that represents the cornering force that the vehicle is experiencing. The ECM then uses the lateral acceleration information along with other information to calculate the desired turn (yaw) rate. There may be more than one sensor. Lateral acceleration sensors are typically located in the passenger cabin and may be located ahead of the B-pillar, on the vertical surface of the inner rocker panel (one on each side of the vehicle). They may also be located in the C-pillar behind the rear seat cushion or in the engine compartment near the cowl. Note: Most vehicles use two lateral acceleration sensors -Other Parts – the stability control ECM may be the same ECM as the ABS or it may be a separate module. ABS wheel speed sensor information is used to determine speed and wheel lockup. Brake pressure sensor data may inform the ECM of the driver’s braking intentions, while the throttle position sensor data informs the system of a driver’s acceleration request -ECM Function in a Skid – the ECM is programmed to look for a vehicle’s correct path when steering through a corner. Steering angle and speed information allow the ECM to determine intended path, while yaw rate and lateral accelerometer data inform the ECM if this is what the vehicle is actually doing. If the information being sent to the ECM does not match, the computer determines that the vehicle is in a skid. Engine torque may be limited, and brake pressure can be applied by the computer to one or more of the wheel circuits to help maintain control of the vehicle -Understeering and Oversteering – loss of control (skids) can be divided into one of two categories, understeer or oversteer -Oversteer without SCS on left. Understeer without SCS on right. -Understeer Front-Wheel Drive – understeer occurs when a driver attempts to turn and the front tires begin to slip. The front wheels are turned, but the vehicle does not respond and continues on its original course. On front-wheel drive vehicles, this may be caused by the drive wheels spinning too fast for the corner (too much throttle). Front-wheel drive vehicles can also understeer if a corner is entered too fast. When a front-wheel drive vehicle understeers, the skid control system may instruct the ECM to adjust the throttle and/or apply braking -Understeer Rear-Wheel Drive – when a rear-wheel drive vehicle understeers, the skid control system instructs the ECM to reduce the throttle before engaging the appropriate brake circuit to correct the skid -Oversteering – oversteering occurs when a vehicle is turning and the rear tires begin to slide away from the direction of the turn. This occurs most often on rear-wheel drive vehicles with slipping drive wheels. When a rear-wheel drive vehicle oversteers, the skid control system instructs the ECM to open or close the throttle, depending on if the drive wheels have too much or too little torque applied for the situation Damage Analysis of Electronic Brake Systems (2/2) Anti-Lock Brake System Damage Analysis Initial Damage Inspections -Inspecting a Conventional Brake System – the vehicle’s conventional brake system must be functioning properly in order for the ABS to operate as designed. It is best to inspect the conventional brake system when inspecting ABS and other related vehicle systems damage, since the ABS operates based on an assumption that the conventional brake system is in good working condition -Inspecting the ABS – with an ABS, it is impossible to diagnose brake system problems judging by brake pedal feel alone. When inspecting the ABS: -Look for physical damage to system parts -Scan the system for diagnostic trouble codes -Note: Keep in mind that some codes may not set until the vehicle has been driven -Observing the Indicator Lamp – there are a variety of dash indicator lamps on vehicles, which typically illuminate when the ignition key is first turned ON. This is considered a lamp test. The dash lamps are used to inform the driver of the status of different systems. They may also light up if the ECM identifies a detectable fault or malfunction in the system, commonly referred to as a malfunction indicator lamp (MIL). An illuminated ABS MIL is an indicator there is a problem and the ABS system will be turned off. When this happens, many of the dependent systems will be offline as well. -ABS Diagnostic Information – a scan tool is required to troubleshoot the ABS and other related electronic systems. Diagnostic trouble codes will not typically tell you if a specific part needs to be replaced, only that a problem exists in that circuit. Further specific testing is usually required to determine the root cause. Always begin with a thorough visual inspection of the parts of the system; this may identify the problem. Some ABS problems may not set trouble codes. It is important to note that if a trouble code is not present, you should not assume that the ABS is functioning normally. A test drive with ABS active stopping event is required to verify the system. Some systems will require specialized tools and equipment to diagnose and repair ABS Parts Damage Analysis -ABS Modulator/Fluid Pump Damage – the modulator valves and fluid pumps may become damaged in a collision. Warning lamps may light up and diagnostic trouble codes will generally be stored if damage has occurred. Damage may include: -Physical damage -Cut or shorted wires -Damaged connectors -Poor terminal contacts due to corrosion or paint overspray -Damaged mounting pads and brackets -Brake fluid leaks -Damaged brake lines -Note: Damaged system parts require replacement. Some electronic brake control units are serviced with the control module and typically require reprogramming when replaced. Bleeding of air from the system may require special tools and equipment. Check the vehicle maker service information for wire or connector repair procedures -Speed Sensors and Tone Rings – speed sensor circuits and tone rings are often damaged during a collision. -Speed Sensor Locations – speed sensors may be located on the: -Steering knuckle or bearing housing -Transmission housing -Rear differential housing -Transfer case housing on rear-wheel ABS systems -Tone Ring Locations – tong rings may be located on the: -Wheel bearing -Brake rotor -Outer CV joint -Transmission shaft -Differential pinion gear -Transfer case on rear-wheel ABS -Speed Sensor and Tone Ring Problems – trouble codes will normally be stored if damage has occurred. The warning lamp may not light until the vehicle is driven. Some problems may include: -Physical damage to the speed sensor -Damaged wire connectors -Cut or shorted sensor wires and shielding -Cracked tone ring or missing teeth -Bent steering or spindle parts, causing improper sensor air gap -The permanent magnet losing its magnetism due to the impact -Trouble codes being set by using different diameter tires or a space saving spare tire -Metal fillings or grease sticking to the sensor, which will cause improper signals -Note: Visual inspection will reveal most collision-related speed sensor circuit problems. Some systems may allow speed sensor circuits to be monitored using a scan tool. Speed sensor wire repairs are typically not permitted on the flexible sections of the wire dur to durability concerns -Switches, Relays, Wires, and Connectors – ABS switches, relays, wires, and connectors may be damaged in a collision. Switches are normally either ON or OFF. When their circuits become damaged during a collision, the ECM may be able to detect the damage. Some ABS systems may turn on warning lamps and set trouble codes for damaged switch circuits. Visual inspection of switch circuits will locate most collision-related problems. Relay circuits may be damaged during a collision or during the repair process. Warning lamps may be illuminated and ECM trouble codes will generally be stored if damage has occurred. Problems may include: -Physical damage -Cut or shorted wires to either coil or contact circuits -Poor terminal contacts due to corrosion or paint overspray -Wires backed out of connectors -Electronic Brake Control Additional Features – ABS and electronic brake controls enable a variety of additional features on vehicles. Damage analysis of many of these systems is similar to ABS damage analysis and should include the inspection of the additional parts associated with each system. -Traction Control -TCS operation is typically integrated into the ABS and/or stability control system, so damage inspection will usually be similar to, and inclusive of, these systems. Some vehicles may have separate unique indicators, switches, and sensors that may be susceptible to damage. Keep in mind the system usually communicates with the PCM over the vehicle communications network. -Stability Control – stability control system operation may be integrated ino a module with the ABS and other related vehicle functions and communicates with other modules and systems on the vehicle. Damage inspection will usually be similar to, and inclusive of, these systems. The steering angle sensor (SAS), lateral accelerometers, and other system parts should be inspected for damage. The SAS should be calibrated if it is serviced or operations are performed on the vehicle that affect the centering or calibration of the SAS, such as suspension work, or anything that affects the alignment angles. Programming or coding of the SAS is required on some vehicles -Adaptive Cruise Control – adaptive cruise control (ACC) utilizes a radar unit that sense vehicles on the road ahead and has the ability to slow the vehicle and maintain a set distance behind lead vehicles while limiting speed to a preset maximum. This is accomplished through network communications, where the ACC requests the application of brakes through the ABS and throttle control through the PCM. Vehicles equipped with this feature vary in their ability to slow or stop the vehicle completely. There are additional features available on some vehicles that may include collision mitigation or braking. If the ABS system is inoperative, all of the additional features will be offline as well. -Other Features – vehicles may have additional brake system-related features, such as rollover protection, trailer sway control, integrated trailer brake control, hill start assist, and hill descent control. These features usually operate using the ABS/TCS systems and incorporate a dash or steering wheel switch, an indicator light, or information system message, and may include additional control modules and system parts. Inspection and damage analysis considerations are similar to those that apply to ABS and other related systems Damaged Analysis of Drivetrains (1/2) Drivetrain Overview -Drivetrain Overview – the drivetrain consists of a collection of components in a vehicle that transfers power from the engine to the wheels. The engine converts fuel into motion to move the vehicle. Vehicles are required to comply with specific laws regarding the fuel economy and emission (pollution) generated. The entire vehicle is designed to help meet these requirements. This includes the shape of the body to reduce aerodynamic drag, powertrain design, including engine and transmission design, and drive gear ratio to tire size and design. This course will cover inspection considerations for the engine and the transmission, the driveshaft, and the subframe, which are drivetrain components. -Damage Analysis of Drivetrains – when conducting damage analysis of the engine, transmission, or other drivetrain-related parts, look for cut or damaged wires, and damage to connectors, sensors, actuators, and modules. Any connecting linkages, lines, hoses, or tubes should be inspected for damage and leaks. Follow original equipment manufacturer (OEM) service information when considering repairs. Some part replacements will require initializations, coding, and/or programming -Powertrain Control Module – the powertrain control module (PCM) precisely monitors a variety of sensors, and manages air/fuel delivery, spark timing, and variable valve timing (on some engines) for engine operation, efficiency, and emissions compliance. The PCM or a separate transmission control module usually controls automatic transmissions. These modules have the ability to self-test, and test the electrical circuits connected to them. If faults are detected, diagnostic trouble codes (DTCs) will be stored. Scanning the vehicle’s electronic systems will identify if DTCs are present. Some emissions-related codes may not set until the vehicle is driven, and has met specific conditions. -Communication to the PCM – there are varieties of sensors on the engine that provide information to the PCM. For example: -Temperature sensors provide temperature information to the PCM for engine/transmission and cooling fan operation. -The throttle position sensor provides information about the throttle plate opening -The oil pressure sensor reports oil pressure information to the PCM -Crankshaft and camshaft sensors on the engine send signals to the PCM, which are used to determine spark timing and fuel delivery -Note: The crankshaft position sensor is usually located near the harmonic balancer on the front of the engine and camshaft position sensors are usually mounted at the end of the camshaft on the cylinder head. -Damage Analysis of the PCM – damage to the PCM is possible. The PCM should be inspected for: -Cut, pulled, or shorted wires -Cracked or broken connectors -Physical damage to the PCM module -DTCs -Note: Wiring harness and connector service parts vary by vehicle maker. In some situations, wiring harness replacement may be require due to the severity of damage or parts availability. A damaged PCM will require replacement and programming. Physical damage to the PCM case may cause internal damage to the PCM module. Engine -Engine – an engine is essentially an air pump. The air intake system brings in air and delivers it to the cylinders. Fuel is either mixed with the air, before it enters the cylinder, or is directly injected into the cylinders. Once the air/fuel mixture is ignited, resultant exhaust gasses are removed from the cylinder and vehicle via the exhaust system -Engine Inspection – when inspecting the front of the engine (crankshaft end with the accessory belt) inspect the belt and crank pulley. Follow the belt path, inspecting the condition of all pulleys and belt tensioners. If equipped, inspect the harmonic balancer and engine timing covers for any signs of damage. Inspect the alternator and other engine-mounted accessories for any signs of damage to the pulleys, shaft, case, mounting brackets, wires, connectors, and connected lines or hoses. The inability to identify potential problem areas can lead to high supplemental costs. When estimating damage to an engine, it is important to consider that if there is major exterior damage, there is also the possibility of internal part damage as well. -Engine Mounts – the engine mounts support the engine. They also work with the transmission mounts to control movement and vibration, and maintain drivetrain alignment. Mounts are typically rubber isolators or bushings molded to metal brackets. They may be oil-filled and/or vacuum operated using valves controlled by the PCM. Inspect for bent or broken mounts and hardware. Damaged oil-filled mounts may leak oil. Damaged mounts should be replaced. -Engine Cover Damage – the engine cover is located near the upper portion of the engine and is used to protect the engine. Damage may occur if something falls on it. If the engine cover is damaged, a careful inspection of all parts under it is required to identify any possible hidden damage. Air Intake, Fluids, and Fuel Systems -Air Intake Systems – the air intake system brings in air through air ducts, filters it through the air filter box, and supplies it to the mass airflow sensor. The mass airflow sensor measures the amount of air entering the engine. Next, the air is routed to the throttle body, which regulators how much air enters the intake manifold. The intake manifold distributes the air to each cylinder. The throttle body permits control of engine speed. When inspecting the air intake system, inspect each part of the system for damage. This includes bent, cracked, cut, or broken parts, crushed or restricted ducts, hoses, or tubes, and damaged electrical wires, connectors, and sensors, -Turbochargers – some vehicles have turbochargers, which compress the incoming air being supplied to the engine. A turbocharged engine has additional parts in the air intake system that require inspection including the turbocharger, intercooler(s), and associated connecting hoses and tubing. When inspecting turbochargers, look for damage to any connected lines, hoses, tubes, linkages, actuators, heat shields, turbo housing, attaching hardware, and brackets. Inspect any oil or coolant lines and hoses connecting to the turbo for bends, kinks, or other damage. Restricted oil or coolant to a turbo will lead to premature failure. -Intercoolers – intercoolers are designed to cool the compressed air from the turbocharger before delivering it to the throttle body and intake manifold. They are typically mounted behind the front bumper or grill, in front of or below the air conditioner (A/C) condenser, and are vulnerable to debris impact or collision damage. They may also be located between the A/C condenser and engine radiator. Inspect an intercooler for cracks, punctures, and broken or bent brackets and fins. Repairs are typically limited to minor straightening of the brackets and fins. -Superchargers – superchargers, which compress air entering the engine, are typically only found on very high-performance vehicles. Superchargers are belt-driven devices that are usually attached to the air intake manifold and should be inspected for damage to the belt, pulley, and body of the supercharger -Repair/Replace Decisions – it is important to identify if any broken parts, foreign objects, or debris have been ingested into the turbocharger(s), supercharger, and/or engine, as internal damage can occur. Further disassembly of the intake system or engine components may be required for inspection. A borescope may allow some internal inspections to be done. If any damage is present, servicing or replacement of the affected items, following OEM service procedures by a qualified technician is necessary. -Fluids – the engine uses motor oil to keep internal parts lubricated. Coolant (also known as antifreeze) keeps the engine from overheating. The coolant and the motor oil are contained in their own separate, sealed systems. Fluids should be checked for contamination and proper levels. An engine that has been run with contaminated fluids, an incorrect type of fluid, or improper amounts of fluids may have damage. It is important to note loss-related issues versus maintenance concerns -Contaminated Fluids – contaminated fluids must be removed from the vehicle and replaced with proper fluid types, in accordance to the vehicle-specific service information. It is important to determine the reason fluid contamination occurred and resolve this before replacing the fluid. Flushing of the affected system and additional service work will likely be required depending on the extent of other parts affected or damaged. Internal engine bearing damage is likely in situations where a vehicle has been run with oil contaminated by antifreeze or water. Note: Higher than normal fluid levels may indicate contamination. -Valve Cover – valve covers are typically plastic or aluminum and may develop hairline cracks if impacted. If crushed or broken, valve covers may conceal damage to valve train parts. Broken parts or debris may fall into internal engine passages, requiring additional internal engine inspection and disassembly. Damaged valve covers should be replaced. Damage to cylinder head or valve train components will likely require removal of the affected cylinder head to service. -Oil Pan – the oil pan is located at the bottom of the engine, which makes it susceptible to damage from situations such as contracting a parking bumper, terrain impact during off-road driving, or road debris. The oil pan should be inspected for cracks, dents, and leaks. If the oil pan is damaged, the oil pick-up tube may also be damaged. This may cause oil delivery issues in the engine leading to internal damage. Damaged oil pans and pickups should be replaced. The oil filter and mount should also be inspected for damage. Some vehicles may have an oil cooler and lines that should be inspected for damage as well. -Fuel Systems – when inspecting the fuel system, inspect the fuel pump, fuel lines, the fuel tank, the fuel filler cap, the inertia switch, and the fuel filter. -Fuel Pumps and Lines – fuel pumps are usually located in the fuel tank and, in rare situations, may dislodge from their mounting due to collision forces. Fuel lines are generally metal or plastic, and may have flexible rubber or braided hoses where the lines attach to the engine. All lines and hoses should be inspected for kinks, cuts, crushing, or leaks. These should be replaced and not repaired. Along with pressurized fuel lines, the fuel tank filler hose should be inspected for damage. Lines or hoses that are moved out of position should be restored to their original routing and retainers installed. Note: Some diesel and classic vehicles may have an engine-mounted fuel pump -Fuel Tank – fuel tanks may be plastic or steel. Damage may include gouges, dents, cuts, cracks, or punctures. Steel tanks should be inspected for leaks that could be a result of the collision damage or from corrosion. Fuel tank leaks may create a hazardous situation that can result in severe injury or death and cause property damage. Do not repair metal fuel tanks that have corrosion damage. If a plastic fuel tank is damaged, it should not be repaired. Fuel tanks pose an explosion and fire hazard. If any questions exist as to the long-term durability, replace the fuel tank. Note: Specialty restoration shops may be able to repair some metal fuel tanks. -Fuel Tank Filler Neck – the fuel tank filler neck is a rubber hose that connects the metal fill tube to the fuel tank. The rubber hose is fastened with clamps. Some filler neck assemblies have a smaller tube running beside the main fill tube to help control fuel splash-back during refueling. The filler neck attaches to the body with a pocket, usually made of plastic, which has a small drain at the bottom. Upon inspection, damaged parts are typically replaced. -Fuel Filler Cap – the fuel cap seals the system at the filler opening. Some vehicles are capless and may have a seal around the fuel pocket that seals to the fuel door, as well as a spring-loaded flap to seal the fill port. If the cap does not seal and allow the fuel tank to become slightly pressurized, or hold a vacuum, a DTC may be set. Fuel filler caps should be inspected for any damage or conditions that would prevent them from sealing and should be replaced if damaged or missing -Fuel Pump Inertia Switch – the fuel pump inertia switch, also known as the fuel pump shut-off switch, is designed to shut off the fuel pump when it is detected that the vehicle has come to an unusually sudden or forceful stop. The fuel pump inertia switch should be pushed to reset. If the switch is defective, replacement is required. -Fuel Filter – most late model vehicles use an in-line fuel filter mounted under the vehicle. Depending on the situation, the filter may incur damage and not allow fuel flow, or may leak fuel. Depending on the type of damage, contamination of the fuel system can cause drivability problems after repairs have been completed. -Ignition System – the PCM controls the ignition system, which provides high voltage to the spark plugs to ignite the air/fuel mixture in the cylinders at the appropriate time. A coil on plug (COP) arrangement is most common on modern vehicles. Some vehicles may use a single coil or two coils, and use spark plug wires to carry the high voltage to the spark plugs. When inspecting the ignition system, look for cut or broken wires, and damaged connectors, coil(s), and spark plugs. Note: Distributors were mechanical devices with a rotating contact used to direct the high voltage to the appropriate cylinder and may be found on older vehicles. Emission and Exhaust -Emissions Control – the catalytic converter, the evaporative emissions control (EVAP) system, the positive crankcase ventilation (PCV) system, and the exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) system are examples of vehicle emission control systems found on vehicles. Each of these systems should be inspected and, typically, damaged components are replaced. Many tests performed on these systems require special equipment and procedures not usually done by a collision repair technician. Damage or problems to an emission system usually results in a driveability problem. Likewise, a driveability problem usually causes an emissions problem. -Emissions Label – the emissions label is located in the engine compartment, and contains emission specifications/certification information. It should be replaced if damaged or defaced. If the component that the emissions label attaches to is replaced, verify that the correct emissions label is installed. Document all attempts in obtaining a replacement emissions label. Save the existing label in case it is not possible to obtain an exact replacement -PCV System – the PCV system relieves crankcase pressure by recirculating “blow-by” gases that escape past the piston rings into the crankcase during the combustion process. The PCV valve is typically installed in the rocker arm cover or intake manifold, with a passage to the crankcase. It opens when the engine is running at idle. The PCV valve is pushed nearly closed when the engine is under load. When inspecting the PCV system, look for loose or damaged lines, connections, valves, and gaskets. If the large diameter vacuum line is pulled off, it may result in a high idle, stalling, or DTCs to be set -EVAP System – the EVAP system is a closed system designed to contain excess fuel vapors in a charcoal-filled canister until a purge valve is opened, allowing vapors to be drawn into the engine and consumed. System parts typically include the fuel tank, filler neck and cap, EVAP canister, vapor lines, a rollover valve in the vapor line or at the fuel tank, vacuum/pressure sensors, service port with green cap, and a vapor purge valve. EVAP systems have a vent valve for the canister, which may be built into the canister or separate, a purge valve, and line from the EVAP canister to the engine. -EVAP Inspection – damage to the EVAP system may include a cracked or broken canister, loose or damaged vapor lines or connections, damaged or stuck valves, fuel tank, filler neck and cap, and damage to sensors, wiring, and connections. Damaged EVAP system parts should be replaced. Do not repair unless there is an OEM-specific procedure. Damage that results in pressure or vacuum leaks will typically cause a DTC to be set. This may require specific conditions and more than one drive cycle. Special smoke generators can be used to locate leaks in the EVAP system. Scan tools may be required to test some system parts. Note: Fuel odors may indicate a compromise to the EVAP system -EGR System – the EGR system is controlled by the PCM, which opens a valve between the exhaust and the intake manifold, recirculating a portion of the exhaust gases back through the combustion process. This reduces oxides of nitrogen (NOx) emissions by reducing the temperature of the combustion process. The EGR system may have tubes that connect the valve, intake, and exhaust manifolds as well as a sensor to detect gas flow. Some vehicles do not require an EGR system to meet the required emission standards -EGR System Inspection – when inspecting an EGR system, look for visible signs of damage to the system parts such as bent or broken tubes, valves, wiring, sensors, or connectors. The EGR valve can seize open and create rough idle, detonation, and power loss, as well as excessive emissions. Electronically controlled valves can be checked using a scan tool to activate the valve. Vacuum-controlled valves may be checked by applying vacuum and checking the valve movement. Service manual procedures should be followed. -Exhaust Systems – exhaust system parts, including the exhaust manifolds, oxygen sensors, exhaust pipes, catalytic converter, and muffler should be inspected for damage -Exhaust Manifolds – exhaust manifolds may be damaged during a collision. A cracked exhaust manifold can cause inaccurate oxygen sensor readings, setting a DTC. Damaged exhaust manifolds must be replaced. New gaskets, if applicable, should be installed. Inspect heat shields and other related parts for damage. Damaged heat shields are typically replaced; however, minor straightening may be permitted -Oxygen Sensors- oxygen (O2) sensors are used to determine if the exhaust gases are oxygen rich or lean, allowing the PCM to adjust fuel delivery. O2 sensors are commonly found on the exhaust manifold and on the exhaust pipes, before and after the catalytic converters. O2 sensors that are on the exhaust may be vulnerable in front end collisions, where the radiator core support and cooling components are pushed back into the engine area. Inspect for damage to the sensors, wires, and connector. Oxygen sensor damage may cause the vehicle to run rough. Damaged oxygen sensors must be replaced. -Exhaust Pipes – exhaust pipes are used to connect various parts of the exhaust system. Inspect exhaust system parts for bends, kinks, collapsed areas, cracks at joints and flanges, and broken or cracked welds. A kinked exhaust pipe can reduce engine efficiency and cause a rough running condition. A flexible exhaust decoupler is a section of flexible pipe that isolates the exhaust system from engine movement and may damaged in a collision, causing it to leak. Damaged exhaust parts are typically replaced. Any straightening should be confined to minor bends to ensure that no restrictions, leaks, or damage to coatings on the pipe occurs -Catalytic Converter – the catalytic converter contains an internal element that may be damaged if the exhaust system or the converter is impacted. Catalytic converts are emission control devices and are not repairable. Federal law states that they must not be permanently removed. If a catalytic converter is replaced in the U.S., the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) requires removed converters be kept on site for a minimum of 15 days from the date removed and be marked to indicate the vehicle, the work order number, or the date of removal and customer’s name. copies of work invoices, statements, and warranties must be retained at the facility for six months, -Muffler – mufflers are used on the vehicle to reduce the noise emitted by the exhaust system. The muffler can become damaged and cause restrictions to the exhaust gas flow or undesirable noise from holes. Damaged mufflers should be replaced -Diesel Exhaust Systems – diesel exhaust systems reduce the oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and particulates, or soot, emitted from diesel exhaust. The system typically has a diesel oxidation catalyst, selective catalytic reduction, and a diesel particulate filter, in additiona to mufflers and pipes. A diesel exhaust fluid (DEF) storage tank, lines, pump, and selective catalytic reduction (SCR) comprise an exhaust aftertreatment system. The aftertreatment system injects a small amount of DEF into the exhaust. DEF is mixed with the exhaust in the presence of a catalyst turning NOx into nitrogen and water vapor. Inspect for damage to any of the system parts or contamination of fluids. Note: The DEF must not be contaminated as it can damage the SCR Inspecting for Rollover Damage -Inspecting for Rollover Damage – during a rollover, the engine may sustain internal damage or physical damage from impact with the ground or other objects. Internal damages may result from operation with no oil or if oil or fluid exists in places where it should not. The engine running without oil may cause bearing damage. All internally lubricated systems with a pressurized oil system, such as the engine, transmission, and power steering systems, may incur this type of damage when deprived of oil. -Key Component Inspection - vehicles with rollover damage should be inspected for liquid-filled cylinders and internal damage to the engine and transmission. Engine damage may include the pistons, connecting rods, and crankshaft. Internal damage may be indicated if there are unusual noises from the engine or transmission. If internal damage is suspected, disassembly may be required to verify the extent of damage. Do not start the engine if damage is suspected. Ensure that all fluids are clean and at the proper level, and that the engine will turn over properly before attempting to start the engine -Key Inspection Procedures – hydraulic lockup occurs when fluid is in a cylinder. To check for hydraulic lockup, remove the spark plugs and manually rotate the engine. If liquids are present, continue to manually rotate the engine to remove the liquid. After most of the liquid has been removed, turn the engine over using the starter to force any remaining liquid from the cylinders. Exhaust color can aid in diagnosis, as burning fluids in the engine will cause exhaust to change colors. White exhaust indicates water or coolant, black exhaust indicates a rich fuel condition, and blue exhaust indicates burning oil. Note: Fluids do not compress, hydraulic lockup can cause internal engine damage. Damaged Analysis of Drivetrains (2/2) Transmission -Transmission – the transmission is designed to transfer torque from the engine to the driveshafts, and ultimately the wheels, while increasing or decreasing torque to help optimize fuel economy. A visual inspection of the transmission must be completed to determine if damage is present. -Visual Inspection – a visual inspection of the transmission includes inspecting for damage to linkages, dipstick, wires, sensors, connectors, lines, and hoses, fluid leaks/leaking seals, fluid pan damage, and cracks in the case. Inspect external transmission coolers and a manual transmission clutch operation. Check transmission fluid levels and for transmission fluid contamination, which may include water, coolant, foreign fluids, engine oil, or particulates. If a burnt odor is detected, the fluid should be changed using the recommended fluid type. If safe to do so, test-drive the vehicle to verify proper operation of the transmission in all gears and shift points, and to verify clutch operation on manual transmission. Note: A scan tool is required to identify if transmission related DTCs are present. -Repair/Replace Decision – if the wrong fluid or amount of fluid has been used in the vehicle, damage to the transmission may occur. It is important to note this damage, as it may be deemed non-collision related. If a pan is dented or crushed, internal damage is possible and will require disassembly for further inspection. Repairs to a damaged transmission case are limited due to durability concerns and usually require replacement. Most damage to other transmission parts will require replacement of the damaged parts Driveshafts -Driveshafts – a driveshaft is a mechanical component for transmitting torque and rotation from the transmission to the differential, or from the engine to the transaxle on vehicles with a front engine-rear transaxle configuration. Universal joints (U-joints), or constant velocity (CV) joints are incorporated to accommodate rotating parts at different angles. Yokes and slip joints connect the driveshaft tube at each end. Some driveshafts are multi-piece with a center support bearing. Front-wheel drive vehicles have two half shafts that transmits torque to the front wheels, one for each side. They are referred to as half shafts because a half shaft only runs from the transaxle to one wheel. -Driveshaft Inspection – when inspecting driveshafts, check for free-play in the splines, bearings, and supports, loose or damaged U-joints, missing weights, dents, or other damage. A vibration that increases as vehicle speed increases may indicate a bent or out of balance driveshaft. Clunking when shifting into gear, or shaking when loading and unloading the drivetrain are signs of parts that are worn or damaged and require replacement. Note: Document wear and tear items unrelated to the collision and communicate to customer -Driveshaft Repair/Replace Decisions – damaged driveshafts should be replaced. Do not attempt repairs to the tube or damaged ends (yokes). Replacement carrier bearings, U-joints, and yokes are typically unavailable. Some machine shops specialize in servicing, balancing, or new construction of driveshafts. -CV Joint – if a vehicle was driven to a repair facility, the customer should be consulted about how the vehicle handles. This may be helpful for identifying half shaft problems. Note: Do not test-drive before doing a complete visual inspection -Inspection – reports of clicking noises during turns may indicate a damaged outer CV joint. Clunking noises, a shudder, or shaking during acceleration may indicate that either CV joint may be damaged. Damaged or severely worn inner tripod joints may cause the steering wheel to shake slightly due to the torque loading and unloading inconsistently; this typically happens under light load conditions. On high mileage vehicles, this may be more common where the inner CV joint is in close proximity to the exhaust. When doing a visual inspection, look for torn CV boots, grease leaks, and bent or otherwise damaged parts -Repair/Replace Decision – damaged CV joints and CV joint parts should be replaced in accordance to the vehicle specific service information. Individual service parts for half shafts are typically available, but depending on the extent of damage, an assembly may be more viable. If a CV boot is damaged, inspect for dirt or other contaminations that may have entered the joint this will require further disassembly and inspection and may require joint replacement -Halfshafts Inspection – when inspecting vehicles with suspected suspension or drivetrain damage, a visual inspection of the vehicle’s halfshafts should be conducted. Inspect for incorrect position in the transaxle. This can be caused by a shifted engine, damaged engine mount, or suspension damage. In some situations, the inner tripod may separate from the inner joint inside the boot. Ensure that there are no incorrect, missing, or damaged parts. Inspect the tone rings for damage or missing teeth. When inspecting the splines and joints, also check for free-play. Depending on which part is damaged, halfshafts may be repaired using service parts. Bent halfshafts should not be straightened. Note: Never pull on the shaft portion of the CV axle, as this may cause the tripod bearing to come out of the inner joint. Always pull on the inner joint assembly. -Checking Drive Axle Position – positioning of the drivetrain parts in relation to the vehicle structure in front-wheel drive vehicles is critical, because the drive wheels are also steering wheels. Inspect the drivetrain mounts and brackets for damage as well as subframe position. To check the position of the drivetrain and axles: -1) Measure forward from a symmetrical reference point to both ends of the drive axle shafts -2) Cross measure these points -3) Compare side-to-side measurements -Note: Most vehicles will be symmetrical. A three-dimensionally correct vehicle structure will help ensure the drivetrain position and output shaft angles from the transaxle are correct. If inner CV joint tripod engagement depth is not adequate, the joint may separate when making a turn. Subframe -Subframe – a subframe is a component of a vehicle that typically bolts on to the unitized structure of the vehicle to support certain components, usually steering and suspension parts. An engine cradle is a type of subframe that supports the engine and transmission as well. The rear subframe supports suspension components that are at the rear of the vehicle as well as the rear differential on some rear-wheel or all-wheel drive vehicles. Subframes and engine cradles may be made of steel, aluminum, or magnesium -Engine Cradle – the engine cradle is bolted to the unitized structure and may support the engine, transaxle, front suspension, and steering gear. Depending on the vehicle maker, an engine cradle may also be called a subframe or engine frame. An engine cradle is susceptible to underbody damage. A damaged engine cradle/subframe may affect steering, suspension, and drivetrain alignment. If damage is suspected, measurements can be compared to dimension sheets, the vehicle collision repair manual, or to a known good part. Damaged subframes and engine cradles are not normally repaired, unless specific OEM procedures exist. -Engine Cradle Position – engine cradle position can be checked by inspecting for bent or out-of-position mounting fasteners and bushings and the position of dowel pins or alignment holes, or by comparing side-to-side measurements by selecting symmetrical locations on the vehicle to locations on the engine cradle. Fasteners that are not centered in the mounting pads of the cradle may indicate that the cradle has shifted. When inspecting an engine cradle/subframe, look for signs of impact or cracks. New corrosion, flaking, or cracked paint may indicate bent areas. Using dye penetrant and help locate small cracks. Note: An alignment report can help identify engine cradle/subframe position issues, steering axis inclination (SAI) angle issues can indicate movement from side to side, caster issues may indicate rearward movement. -Rear Subframe – rear subframes (steel or aluminum) bolt to the unitized structure and connect to the rear control arms, and may house other rear suspension parts. Positioning of the rear subframe can affect the vehicle thrust angle and tracking. If the vehicle is rear-wheel or all-wheel drive, the rear differential will be mounted to the rear subframe. Rear subframes are inspected similarly to an engine cradle, and are typically replaced when damaged. Servicing of subframes and engine cradles will require wheel alignment, and may require specific calibrations depending on how the vehicle is equipped. Note: Some fasteners used on subframes and engine cradles may be one time use. Be sure to consult vehicle-specific service information. Damage Analysis of Driving Assist Systems (1/2) Blind Spot Detection System -Blind Spot Detection System Introduction – many vehicles are now equipped with blind spot detection systems that detect vehicles approaching from behind an adjacent lane. On some vehicles, the blind spot detection system has an indicator lamp in the door mirror. The blind spot detection system: -Engages when the turn signal is activated and signals the driver when a vehicle is approaching -Generally uses radar to gauge the distance of approaching vehicles -May use a camera in the door mirror to watch for approaching vehicles -Is designed to ignore stationary objects -Blind Spot Detection System, cont’d – blind spot detection systems that use radar sensor -Have an indicator lamp on the door mirror that alerts the driver to the proximity of the approaching vehicle -May have a warning chime and a message in the instrument panel cluster to indicate an approaching vehicle -May allow the brightness of the indicator lamp to be adjusted to compensate for peripheral perception deterioration -Note: In some cases, the indicator lamp glows continuously when a vehicle is approaching and flashes when the vehicle is in the critical area -Radar Technology – the radar sensor for most blind spot detection systems is based on existing technology. For example, the advanced phased array radar technology system designed for the military guides missiles to their target. This system is miniaturized for use in blind spot detection, and is equipped with reduced power requirements. The system design tracks approaching vehicles by determining distance and closing rate. Other systems use Doppler radar technology. This type of radar, most commonly associated with weather radar, detects moving targets while ignoring the stationary targets. -Blind Spot Detection System Parts – primary blind spot detection system parts include: -Sensors, which are generally located behind the rear bumper cover, on each side. -Cameras, which are typically mounted beneath door mirrors to aid in detecting approaching traffic -A steering wheel, which on some systems vibrates when vehicles are detected in the blind spot -A control module, which calculates speed, object position, and vehicle tracking. Control modules cannot be adjusted or repaired -Blind Spot Detection System Operation – the blind spot detection system uses calculations to determine when an approaching vehicle enters and leaves the blind spot area. The computer software calculates when, in what manner, and in which situations a warning should be issued. The system applies voltage to the indicator lamp in the door mirror, illuminating the warning indicator. The range varies according to the vehicle maker. For example, on some vehicles, the range of the sensors extends rearward from the door mirrors to about 10 feet beyond the rear bumper, while on other vehicles the range may extend 11 feet beyond the rear bumper area. Note: On vehicles that use a camera-based system, the cameras can detect objects up to 31 feet rearward from their location on the door mirrors. -Does the Vehicle have Blind Spot Detection? – some indications that the vehicle is equipped with a blind spot detection system include: -Door mirrors equipped with an LED that lights when the approaching vehicle comes into the blind spot -An icon on the driver information center or instrument cluster -A switch to turn the system on or off -Note: On some vehicles, the mirror LEDs light when the vehicle is started -Blind Spot Detection System Damage Analysis – when performing damage analysis, check for a damaged: -Bumper bracket and/or bumper beam -Bumper cover -Door mirror -Note: Even in light impacts, a sensor can be damaged, and bent or collapsed bumper parts can affect sensor positioning and alignment. This will cause improper readings by the sensors. With some systems, the sensors are identical. In these cases, the sensors may be swapped from one side of the vehicle to the other when troubleshooting potential problems. However, sensors should not be swapped from one vehicle to another, as these sensors may perform differently from one model to the next. -Road Conditions and System Performance – in some cases, road conditions may result in system performance issues not related to mechanical damage. Some examples include: -Debris such as dirt, snow, or mud that builds up over the sensor, preventing an accurate reading -Severe weather, such as rain or snow, which affects the operation and causes occasional missed alerts -Towing a trailer or an object, such as a bicycle rack attached to the rear of the vehicle, will cause the system to not operate properly -Road Conditions and System Performance cont’d – other conditions that may cause the system not to operate properly include when: -Several vehicles accelerate from a standing start with a vehicle alongside -A vehicle moves from two lanes over to the adjacent lane -The rate of speed of the approaching vehicle is too fast -Note: On some vehicles, the system only engages if the blind spot detection system is switched on and vehicle speed is above 10 mph -Blind Spot Detection Diagnostics – beyond physical damage, a scan tool will be required to assess a malfunctioning blind spot detection system for proper diagnostics and trouble code retrieval -Blind Spot Part Replace Considerations – if the blind spot detection system sensors have been replaced, calibration is generally required using vehicle-specific diagnostic equipment. Calibration may also be required after rear bumper cover removal or replacement of the control modules. Calibration of the sensors is particularly vital, because the measurements taken from these points determine if a signal should be sent to indicate an approaching vehicle. The calibration essentially informs the computer of the sensor’s exact position so that the proper calculation can be made Cross-Traffic Alert System -Cross-Traffic Alert System Description – some vehicles are equipped with a feature called a cross-traffic alert system. This system assists the driver with oncoming traffic when backing out of a parking space. The system warns of an approaching vehicle with: -An audible alert from the parking aid speaker -A visual alert on the right or left door mirror -A message on the instrument panel cluster -Note: Some vehicles may display a warning that states either “Vehicle Coming From Right” or “Vehicle Coming From Left”. The system may detect vehicles approaching from up to 45 feet away. However, this distance may vary. -Cross-Traffic Alert System Operation – the cross-traffic alert system: -Uses many of the same parts as a blind spot detection system, such as sensors located behind the rear bumper cover. -Utilizes radar that detects an approaching vehicle -Has sensors that work at a 90 degree angle -Works for straight and angled parking -Only operates in reverse -Note: Some cross-traffic alert systems can be turned on or off with an ON/OFF function in the message center -Cross-Traffic Alert System Damage Analysis – because the system uses the same parts as the blind spot detection system, damage to the rear bumper or rear portion of the quarter panel can cause damage to the system. Additionally, the repair considerations are similar to the blind spot detection system. If a fault is detected on the instrument panel cluster, a scan tool is recommended for troubleshooting the problem. Similar to the blind spot detection system, items such as dirt, mud, snow, and other debris built up on the sensors can result in system malfunction Parking Assist System -Parking Assist System Description – parking assist has progressed to the point where most vehicle makers offer the system as an option or standard equipment on their new models. There are two types of parking assist. These include: -Assist only, where the system provides visual and/or audio feedback to help determine the distance to obstacles. -Hands-free parallel parking assist -Parking Assist – Assist Only – the parking assist system is designed to: -Calculate the distance to an object from the rear of the vehicle. Some systems engage when they detect an object 8 feet behind the vehicle -Provides audible and/or visual signals to the driver while parking and maneuvering the vehicle in REVERSE -Works at low speeds, typically less than 5-11 mph -Note: Some systems may also calculate how close an object is to the front of the vehicle when the vehicle is in DRIVE. Additionally, some systems do not detect objects below the bumper, such as people or pets and can be turned on or off manually using a switch on the instrument panel. -Hands-Free Parking Assist – some systems have been designed to automatically parallel park the vehicle into an open parking space. The driver only needs to confirm the desired parking space and apply the brakes when required to control speed. The vehicle handles the proper steering -Parking Assist System Parts – parts that make up the parking assist feature include: -Parking aid sensors, which are located in bumper covers and used to judge the distance to other parked vehicles -Parking aid modules – locations vary -A parking aid speaker that, when the vehicle is in reverse, emits an audible beep sound to alert the driver of any obstacles behind the rear of the vehicle -Cameras, that on some systems are located in the rear or front to provide a visual of the area around the vehicle -Note: Cameras are commonly mounted in the spoiler, deck lid, hatch, or mirrors -Parking Assist System Damage Analysis – many parking assist system parts are positioned in locations that are highly susceptible to damage including collision, wiring, and corrosion damage. Damage to parking assist system parts will typically result in a parking assist malfunction indicator lamp (MIL), but the system may need to be activated to determine if it is operating properly. -Parking Assist System Part Replacement – check parking assist sensors for damage, even after a minor collision. When analyzing damage to the parking assist parts, note that sensors and control modules cannot be adjusted or repaired. Damaged sensors are typically replaced and are generally identical in construction, so there is no specific sensor for reach position in the bumper. The sensors on the rear and front bumper can typically be refinished. However, excessive coats of refinish can hinder sensor performance. Note: Some vehicle makers do not recommend sensors with minor finish damage because excessive paint thickness may adversely affect the operation of the parking assist system. Refer to vehicle-specific service information for repair or replacement recommendations for parking sensor -Hands-Free Parallel Parking Assist Parts – in addition to the parking assist system parts already discussed, there are additional cameras and sensors that are integral parts of the hands-free parallel parking assist system including: -Cameras -Parking assist ECU -Multi-display -Steering angle sensor -Skid control ECU -Park/neutral position switch -Display and navigation -Note: The hands-free parallel parking assist system may utilize cameras mounted in various locations on the vehicle, including the deck lid, tailgate, side mirrors, bumpers, and grille. Identifying damages, other than physical damages, will typically require the use of a scan tool. -Examples of Hands-Free Parallel Parking Assist Operation – when the driver puts the car in reverse, the rearview camera activates and displays on the vehicle dashboard. Pressing the parallel park icon activates the hands-free parallel parking assist feature and displays an indicator square over the parking area. The driver can now go hands-free as the steering system begins to angle the car into the parking space. The system’s parking assist sensors judge the distance to other vehicles. To make calculations and estimates, the parking assist electronic control unit (ECU) uses signals from the: -Cameras -Steering angle sensor -Power steering ECU -Skid control ECU -Engine control module (ECM) -Parking assist sensors -Note: These results create various guidelines, which combine together with video from the camera, and output to the multi-display -Hands-Free Parallel Parking System Damage Analysis – when performing a damage analysis inspection on the hands-free parallel parking system, other than physical damage, use of a scan tool will be required to diagnose the parking assist system. If the parking assist system detects a malfunction: -A diagnostic trouble code (DTC) will be stored -The object alarm module may send a message to the instrument panel cluster to display the SERVICE PARK ASSIST message on the driver information center -A chime may sound -Note: The specific warning may vary depending on the vehicle maker. Depending on the size of the equipped tires (for example, the tire size may affect the rotation of the tire in relation to the steering wheel) and the vehicle angle (for example, the vehicle angle is too small), the parking position may deviate or the vehicle may not be straight -Hands-Free Parallel Parking Assist System Part Replacement – test drives are often used to calibrate specific sensors. If a fuse or the battery is disconnected, the system may require initialization. For example, on some vehicles, if you remove and reinstall the battery, the rearview monitor will be operational, but cannot assist backup parking operation. This is because the center position recognized by the steering angle sensor may not be initialized. When replacing the parking assist ECU, you may also be required to initialize the cameras, and calibrate the steering angle and height control sensors. Damage Analysis of Driving Assist Systems (2/2) Lane Departure Warning System -Lane Departure Warning Assist System Introduction – the lane departure warning assist system helps the driver keep the vehicle in the chosen lane. The system uses audio, visual, or steering wheel vibrations to warn the driver that the vehicle is drifting out of the lane. Some systems use the brakes to provide counter steering force to help keep the vehicle in the lane, but other systems may only provide a warning. The lane departure warning assist system typically operates at a speed of 35 mph or above, depending on the vehicle maker, and requires lane makers. -Lane Departure Warning System Activation – the lane departure warning system is not activated if the turn signal is engaged before changing lanes. If the system is activated, the warning ends when the driver steers back into the lane, a lane change is completed, the vehicle drives on the line for longer than 2.5 seconds, or if the brake pedal is pressed -Lane Departure Warning System Camera – the lane departure sensor is a camera, which is behind the windshield near the interior rearview mirror. The camera and computer are housed in the camera control unit above or within the interior rearview mirror unit, looking at the road ahead and monitoring the lane markings -Active Lane Keeping Systems – active lane keeping systems alert the driver who is drifting out of a lane and nudge the vehicle back into the lane if the driver does not react. The system uses a camera mounted above the interior rearview mirror to watch lane markings. Some vehicles have an instrument panel icon, which illuminate to indicate whether the active lane keeping system is on or off. On some models, an icon that shows a vehicle drifting out of its lane indicates if the active lane keeping system is on or off in the vehicle. Note: as with all active assist electronic systems, it is mandated in the U.S. that there be a driver option to turn the system off -Lane Departure Warning System Parts – primary parts of the lane departure warning system may include: -A camera -A control module -A lane departure warning on/off switch -A vibrator motor (if equipped) -The instrument panel cluster -The radio, for warning notification -Lane Departure Warning System Operation- the Lane Departure Warning System has three modes of operation that include Ready to Assist, Disabled (where the driver switches the system off), and Not Ready to Assist. The ‘Not Ready to Assist’ mode is where the system is active, but not ready to assist because: -The vehicle is traveling below a certain speed, generally 35-42 mph -The system cannot detect lane markings -The windshield in front of the camera has debris that is preventing the camera from detecting the lane markings -Lane Departure Warning System Damage Analysis – a warning in the vehicle message center indicates that the system is not functioning properly. Damage to the system may be indicated by: -Cracks in the windshield that obstructs the camera lens -Damage to the roof panel near the windshield above the camera -Note: When repairs to the lane departure warning system are required, be sure to follow vehicle maker service and calibration requirements -Lane Departure Warning System Limitations – road construction or poorly marked roads will prevent proper operation of the lane departure warning system. The lane departure warning system may not accurately detect: -Temporary markings along construction sites that would confuse the system -Worn and faded road markings -Road markings covered by snow or ice -Road markings on roads with sharp bends -Road markings under very poor weather conditions -Note: These non-mechanical issues can cause the lane departure warning system to appear not to be operating properly Attention Assist System -Attention Assist System Introduction – similar to the lane departure warning feature is the attention assist system. The attention assist system may also be called “drowsy driver”, “attention assist”, or “driver alert control”. The attention assist system monitors the drivers’ attentiveness. The system uses sensor technology to create an overall driver profile at the beginning of a trip and continuously compares the behavior pattern with real-time data from the sensors throughout the journey. A camera monitors the movement between lane markers and assess whether the vehicle is being driven in a controlled way. The sensor information determines the exact time the driver should take a break and provides an audible and/or visual warning -Attention Assist System Parts – many of the same parts used for the lane departure warning system are used for the attention assist system. These include: -A forward sensing camera -Driver information control module -Forward sensing control module -An infotainment module (silences the sound system to provide an audible warning) -A driver information center -Attention Assist System Operation – some systems give the driver an audible alert and a message on the instrument cluster display to recommend the driver stop for a break when the system detects a decrease in concentration. The system may also display bars on the instrument cluster to indicate the driver’s concentration level, with five bars being the highest level of concentration -Attention Assist System Damage Analysis – the attention assist system uses the same camera as the lane departure warning system and may experience similar problems, which may occur from: -Weather and road conditions -Physical damage to the windshield or camera housing -Note: For issues other than physical damage, use a scan tool to diagnose the attention assist system. As with the lane departure warning system, be sure to reference vehicle maker service information to identify calibration requirements following service of the attention assist system. Cracks in the windshield can obstruct the camera’s vision Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) System -Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) System Introduction – the adaptive cruise control (ACC) is an extension of conventional cruise control systems. The ACC system automatically maintains a set distance from a vehicle ahead. The system is not a collision warning or avoidance system; however, parts of the ACC system may be integrated into the collision avoidance systems. The ACC ONLY assists the driver and is not a fully independent driving system. The ACC does enhance driver convenience, since accelerating and braking operations occur without driver intervention. Note: As with conventional cruise control systems, manual inputs from the driver, both to the accelerator and brake, take priority over the ACC system -ACC System Parts Introduction – lets review parts common to the ACC system -Distance Sensor – the distance sensor is a radar or laser sensor depending on the vehicle maker. The sensor is located on the front of the vehicle to detect the presence of a vehicle ahead, and the clearance between the ACC vehicle and the forward vehicle. Some sensors can be found under or behind the front bumper, or behind the grille -Control Modules and Sensors – the control modules include a module specific to the ACC in addition to the ABS and engine control modules. The primary function of the ACC module is to process the radar information and determine if a forward vehicle is present. When the ACC system is in ‘time gap control’, the system sends information to the engine control and brake control modules to control the clearance between the ACC vehicle and the target vehicle. Wheel speed sensors read the speed of the vehicle’s wheel rotation and send the information to the ABS module. The wheel speed sensors determine if a wheel is moving at a different speed than the other wheels on the vehicle -ACC System Damage Analysis – certain conditions may prevent the ACC from engaging. These conditions include, but are not limited to: -A damaged or misaligned sensor, which is the most common problem -Sensor obstruction from paint, stickers, a vehicle front protector, excessive mud, snow, etc. -Bad weather conditions, which may limit the effectiveness of a laser-based distance sensor -Vehicle speed that is too high or too low -Heavy cargo causing the front of the ACC vehicle to rise -The rear of the forward vehicle being extremely dirty, or having no reflectors -Curved road, which prevents the system from contacting a preceding target -Sensor Part Replacement – during replacement of the distance sensor, you must calibrate the ACC system using a scan tool and following vehicle maker service requirements. A sensor alignment tool may also be required for calibration. Similar to other systems, improper vehicle alignment can also cause problems with the ACC system. If the vehicle is unable to track the vehicle ahead due to an excessive thrust angle issue, the system will not work properly. Note: Ensure the vehicle is aligned properly before calibrating the adaptive cruise control. If the vehicle is dog tracking down a road, the sensor may not pick up the vehicle ahead. Collision Avoidance System -Collision Avoidance System Operation – collision avoidance systems detect situations in which a collision may be imminent. The collision avoidance system: -Is designed to predict a collision -Helps prevent the collision from happening or minimizes the severity -Can be used to detect front and rear collisions -Uses forward-object detection with additional information, such as vehicle speed, to predict an imminent collision -Note: A properly operating system determines if the distance between vehicles is at a dangerous level and if a collision is about to happen. The system will forewarn the driver (through audible, visual, and/or physical alerts) of a possible collision to prompt the driver to take preventative action. -Brake Assist – brake assist automatically adjusts the brakes to provide full stopping force as soon as the driver steps on the pedal. Depending on the system, this may be done by increasing the brake pressure and/or moving the brake pads closer to the discs. -Automatic Braking – on vehicles equipped with collision warning with auto braking, both a radar sensor an a camera are used to detect forward vehicles. One advantage of the camera is the possibility of detecting stationary vehicles and warning the driver while maintaining a low false-alarm level. If the driver does not act when a collision is considered imminent, the system will pre-load the brake system and automatically slow or stop the vehicle -Seat Belt Tensioners – the system also adjusts the driver and front passenger seat belt tensioners by reducing slack to restrict occupant movement -Other Warnings – other tasks that may be performed by collision avoidance systems include: -Adjusting the seats into a crash safety position and/or adjusting the seat contour -Closing the sunroof and/or side windows -Raising the head restraints -Adjusting the dampening action of the shock absorbers to help keep the vehicle level -Note: If a collision does not take place, some systems, such as the seat belts and brakes, return to their normal state -Collision Avoidance System Parts – the collision avoidance system: -Is dependent on system options -Uses radar sensors to detect vehicles in front and behind the vehicle -Control module calculates speed, object position, and vehicle tracking -Note: On some vehicles, detecting vehicles and obstacles in front of the vehicle is determined from information provided by the front millimeter wave radar sensor and an object recognition camera. The millimeter wave radar sensor is also used by the adaptive cruise control system. The object recognition camera consists of two side-by-side cameras typically located in the center front area of the headliner -Collision Avoidance System Damage Analysis – correct alignment of a forward object detection sensor is critical for proper system operation. Misalignment may result in incorrect object detection. Situations that result in an out-of-alignment condition may include tampering, damage to the sensor and/or mounting brackets, or normal wear. Collision warning systems provide MILs in the event the system detects an error. The light or message displays on the instrument panel or message center, sometimes combined with an audible warning. This will engage from bad weather, sensor malfunction, or control module malfunction. A complete inspection will require the use of a scan tool to check for diagnostic trouble codes -Collision Avoidance System Part Replacement Considerations – radar replacement requires specific adjustment of the radar sensor beam axis. Correct alignment of sensors is necessary to ensure the proper operation of the system. Calibration may be required following a collision if there is damage in the area of a sensor or if a sensor is replaced. Always reference vehicle maker service information to identify required service procedures and calibrations Damage Analysis of Full-Frame Vehicles (1/2) Full-Frame Vehicles Overview Full-Frame Vehicles -Body-Over-Frame Vehicles – body-over-frame vehicles, also referred to as full-frame vehicles, have a frame independent of the unitized structure. Body-over-frame vehicles have the engine, drivetrain, and steering and suspension parts as well as a unitized structure that bolt to the frame. Body-over-frame designs in non-commercial applications are used for pickup trucks and several sport-utility vehicles, vehicles that are primarily used for heavy-duty purposes Frame Construction -Frame Construction – frames may be constructed of mild steel, high-strength steel (HSS), Ultra-High-Strength Steel (UHSS), high-strength low-alloy steel (HSLA), or a combination of these steel types. There are different frame construction designs used on vehicles as well. These different designs include open C-channel frames and box frames. -Open C-Channel Frames – open C-channel frames are not completely enclosed structures. Depending on the extent of the damage, there may be more opportunity for repair since you have access to the backside of the rail with this type of design -Box Frames – box frames either may be enclosed structures that are assembled with two C-channels seam-welded together or they may be hydroformed. A closed “C” refers to two C-channels welded together to form a box. When viewing them from the end of the rail, the weld overlaps can be seen. Hydroformed box frames are enclosed structures that are made using one piece of steel. Fully enclosed frame rails are more difficult to straighten out compared to open C-channel frame rails because there is no access to the backside -Designs for Strength – some of the designs for strength in newer full-frame construction include the use of welded-on brackets, mounts, and crossmembers. On older model vehicles, crossmembers were riveted to the frame. Crossmembers are now commonly welded to the frame side rails, instead of using rivets. Crossmembers are sometimes passed through the frame rails, and welded on both sides. Using welds instead of rivets adds to the rigidity of the frame -Unitized Structure on Full-Frames – unitized structures bolted to the frame are repaired in a similar way to that of a unibody vehicle. Pillars, rocker panels, and front upper rails must be repaired according to vehicle service information, while taking into consideration the different types of construction materials and part designs -Unitized Structure on Full-Frames Continued – when analyzing full-frame damage, note that similar to a unibody structure, energy created by a collision can transfer and damage areas away from the direct impact. This can cause distortions to the frame that can result in stress to the unitized structure. Sometimes, when the frame is returned to factory dimensions, the stress on the attached unitized structure is relieved and the measurements return to specifications. However, it is important to monitor both upper body and frame dimensions Collision Energy Management -Collision Energy Management – like unibody vehicles, full-frame vehicles also have collision energy management built-in to protect the occupants. To manage collision energy, full-frames may use collapse or crush zones to absorb collision energy. Indentations or convolutes in the front frame rails may be designed to crush. A part collapsed in these areas usually requires replacement, because a straightened collapse zone may not react the same way if involved in another collision. Full-frames may also manage collision energy by using elongated holes or slots, a change in the shape of the part, and reinforcements Damage Analysis of Full-Frame Vehicles (2/2) Full-Frame Repair Considerations Full-Frame Vehicle Damage Analysis -Full-Frame Damage Analysis – when inspecting a full-frame, check for bends in the structure. Depending on the thickness and strength of the metal, bends may or may not be repairable. Heat use when straightening bends is generally limited. You should also check for kinks, which are not repairable, and cracks caused by a collision, which may not be repairable. Some cracks may be repairable, but only if they are stress cracks. Stress cracks may require welding a reinforcement on the front or backside of the crack. When repairing cracks in a frame, reinforcements should NOT be used in collapse zones. When you are inspecting a full-frame, there are other things to check for as well -Non-Repairable Cracks – frame cracks that should not be repaired include cracks: -Near the steering box area -Near a suspension mounting area -On the top or bottom flange of an open C-channel design -Caused by straightening an area that was previously kinked -Note: Follow vehicle maker recommendations for crack repair -Other Inspection Considerations – other items that must be inspected on full-frames include: -Damaged cab mounts -Bent crossmembers -Damaged control arms or suspension mounts -Bent steering mounting brackets -Note: Generally, damaged crossmembers are not serviceable parts unless they are part of an assembly. However, some vehicle makers design vehicles with serviceable crossmembers. Control arm and suspension mounting brackets are difficult to straighten out while also ensuring they are not deformed due to repeated stress. Depending on replacement recommendations, parts may be available. The frame or frame section may need to be replaced. Damage related to trailer hitches is a common occurrence on full-frames. The impact often pushes the frame downward, bending at a point near the end of the trailer hitch. Damaged bumper mounting brackets should not be straightened. These are usually replaced using a bolt-on replacement bracket -Visual Damage Indicators for Full-Frames – on body-over-frame vehicles, the frame assembly may not have visual damage, but there are several indicators that structural damage has occurred. Check for shifted body mounts. The radiator core support on a body-over-frame vehicle is generally bolted to the frame assembly. It is common for the radiator core support to slide during a frontal impact, causing the hood-to-fender gaps to be inconsistent. The gap will generally be tight on one side and wide on the other. Also look for panel misalignment. Inconsistent gaps between the cab and the bed on a pickup truck are an indicator of a diamond condition. One side will generally be wider than the other side. Finally, inspect wheel position in the wheel opening to make sure it is centered Partial Replacement -Partial Replacement Information Sources – there are a number of vehicle-specific partial replacement procedures available. Procedures can be found in: -Vehicle-specific body repair or service information -Procedure bulletins (bulletins usually included with the part, similar to the procedures found in manuals) -Documentation provided with the service part -Note: It is important to reference the vehicle maker’s repair information for procedures and include copies of the repair documentation in the repair order file -Frame Replacement Options – partial replacement at a factory seams may be done depending on the vehicle makers recommendations. Some vehicle makers have front and/or rear frame kits available. Pieces of the frame that are commonly replaced include: -Frame tips or ends, usually in front of a crossmember. The front-end service part may include the crush zone and body mount -Front or rear assemblies that may include both rail ends and a crossmembers -Crush boxes, which are sacrificial parts designed to collapse in a frontal collision, reducing the amount of damage radiating into the structure -Sectioning – if the vehicle maker procedures or recommendations are not available, DO NOT SECTION. This is I-CAR’s position: Vehicle makers design parts to manage collision energy in a specific manner. Introducing a sectioning joint can alter how the part will respond in a collision. For this reason, it is recommended to section a part ONLY if it is recommended by the vehicle maker. Vehicle maker recommendations help ensure the repair does not make the repair area any stronger or weaker than the factory design. Sleeves and reinforcements should only be used when recommended by the vehicle maker. Keep in mind that safety and improper repair techniques can affect airbag deployment. Sectioning cannot be done in the same spot twice. If the damaged part was previously replaced using a sectioning procedure and there is no other acceptable sectioning location, the part cannot be sectioned again. Mounting Areas, Crossmembers, and Accessories -Mounting Area Types – -There are often questions raised about how to repair damaged mechanical or non-mechanical part mounting areas on full-frames, and if repair is allowed or possible. Some examples of mechanical parts mounted to frames include: -Steering and suspension brackets -Cables -Drivetrain mounts -Some examples of non-mechanical parts mounted to frames include: -Body mounts -Support brackets -These parts may be bolted, welded, or riveted directly to the frame rails or crossmembers -Types of Mounting Area Damage – different types of mounting area damage that can occur to attachment points, brackets, or mounts include: -Cracked parts or welds -Tears -Bends in the bracket or mount -Bends in the adjacent frame or crossmember -Elongated holes, such as bolt holes -Repair Choice Considerations – the answer to whether a damaged mount area can be repaired or not is not always clear. All repair choice considerations should be evaluated. -Questions to Ask – -There are certain questions you may ask to determine whether or not a repair should be made: -Is the repair under continuous stress? -If the damage is in an area that moves as the vehicle travels on the road or every time the steering wheel turns, it could have damaged stress cracks in the future -What is the chance for repeat damage? -This not only includes parts in continuous motion, it also includes vulnerable areas if another collision takes place -Are there any safety-related parts involved? -Any repairs made should ensure the vehicle safety systems will respond as designed -Mounting Location Questions – damage to mounting locations of parts that, if not mounted correctly, could cause the vehicle to lose control or lessen the chance of a safe turn or stop, should also be considered. Some questions you can ask to help determine if repairing is an option are: -Is there enough access for welding or another procedure? -Will there be enough access to apply corrosion protection? -Are there any OEM warnings that warn against the repair? -Note: Parts should not be repaired if there are existing warnings against making a repair. The vehicle maker may not have a recommendation for repair, at least repairs related to the bracket or mounting the part itself. With damage to mounting areas, especially suspension or steering mounting areas, whether to repair and how to make the repair is a business decision, since every type of damage is unique and there are limited OEM recommendations -Replacement Considerations – when considering replacement options for damaged frame mounting areas and crossmembers, verify whether or not the vehicle maker provides a service part. If the part is not available as a separate service part, replacement of a major part of the frame, or the entire frame, may be the only option. Replacement procedures for frame mounting areas and crossmembers are rare. If there is no existing replacement procedure, duplicate the factory attachment method. -Frame Accessories – accessories that may be attached to the frame include: -Trailer hitches -Snow plows -Tow hooks -Brush guards -Grille guards -Running boards -Colored display lighting -Frame Accessory Considerations – there are certain points to consider when analyzing frame accessories -Vehicle Maker or Aftermarket Accessories – when repairing collision damage, it may be necessary to determine if a frame accessory is: -A vehicle maker-installed part -An aftermarket-installed part -Note: If the part was installed by the vehicle maker, there may be existing guidelines for repair or replacement. If the part was installed as an aftermarket accessory, there are certain guidelines that may have to be followed for replacement of the part -Aftermarket Considerations – some vehicle makers offer body builder manuals, which are designed for the aftermarket industry. The manuals provide information related to accessory installation and vehicle structure alterations. Information contained in these manuals includes, but is not limited to: -Precautions for drilling -Welding -Suspension alterations -Engine performance alterations -Note: If a customer wants to install a new accessory to an undamaged frame, check with the vehicle makers body builder manual for guidelines related to mounting accessories to the frame. Installation of a non-vehicle maker accessory may present a liability issue. Body builder information may be provided on a website -Damaged Accessories – considerations when analyzing damaged aftermarket or vehicle maker accessories may include: -Checking for maker branding. Vehicle maker parts will need to be acquired through an appropriate distributor -Whether or not a customer consultation is necessary to determine where replacement parts can be purchased or acquired -How the owners insurance policy or company guidelines may apply to the damage caused to accessories -Repair options. One example would be kits that may be available for repairing grille guards -The brand name of the tonneau cover is shown here -Trailer Hitches – the majority of full-frame vehicles have trailer hitches attached to the frame. In a rear-end collision, the trailer hitch acts like a fulcrum and often damages the rear frame rails where the hitch is attached to the frame. Repair options for this type of damage include straightening if the frame is bent, as well as full or partial replacement if the frame is kinked. Partial replacement may be done using a vehicle maker-serviced rear rail section, or a rear frame replacement module. Note: A collision with the trailer hitch, may result in damage that radiates deeper into the frame Damage Analysis of Lighting and Vision Assist (1/3) Adaptive Front Lighting Description -Adaptive Front Lighting – adaptive front lighting was developed to create better visibility while cornering by turning the headlamps in the direction of the turn. This system also: -Automatically levels the low beam headlamps (up/down) to compensate for varying vehicle loads, in addition to quick starts and sudden stops. -Has a fail-safe feature that in case of communication error, the system returns the headlamps to the straight-ahead position. -Note: Some vehicles may be equipped with only the auto-leveling feature, while some contain both the auto-leveling and cornering feature -Adaptive Front Lighting Movement – the headlamp swivel assembly control module drives the headlamp swivel actuator and moves the headlamp to the left and right operational limit. Then it returns to the proper position. On some systems, the right and left headlamps do not rotate simultaneously. While turning, the headlamp swivel actuator responds as follows: -The amount of headlamp movement is dependent on steering wheel rotation. Some systems, have their motorized lamps turn up to 15 degrees in either direction when driving -On other systems, the headlamp control module controls the left headlamp movement by 15 degrees to the left and 5 degrees to the right, and the right headlamp movement by 5 degrees to the left and 15 degrees to the right. Adaptive Front Lighting System Operation -Adaptive Front Lighting Operation – the adaptive front lighting generally does not operate with the transmission in reverse or at vehicle speeds less than 2 mph. This may vary by vehicle maker. Movement of the headlamps may be restricted at low vehicle speeds, and full movement of the lamps may not be allowed until vehicle speed is greater than about 30 mph. -System Operation – for the adaptive front lighting system to work, the headlamp control module receives information from a variety of sources, such as the: -Engine control module (ECM) -Transmission control module (TCM) -Electronic brake control module (EBCM) -Body control module (BCM) -Steering wheel angle sensor -Headlamp switch status -Transmission gear selection -Speed sensor -Note: The headlamp control module calculates the headlamp angle and sends commands to the left and right headlamp actuators, while the direction the headlamps move is controlled by the steering wheel angle sensor. Also, the headlamp actuators drive the headlamps to the position commanded by the headlamp control module. -Automatic Vertical Alignment – for the automatic vertical alignment of the headlamp system to function, the: -Leveling sensors send an output to the headlamp leveling controllers as the vehicle suspension compresses and rebounds -Controllers calculate the difference in vehicle pitch and send a command to the high-intensity discharge (HID) ballast -HID ballast drives the headlamp leveling actuators to the position commanded by the controllers. The headlamp leveling system also monitors the performance of the HID bulb and ballast. -Adaptive Front Lighting Parts (AFS) – adaptive front lighting parts include swiveling and leveling actuators, control modules, and sensors such as: -Steering wheel angle sensor -Vehicle speed sensor -Vehicle height sensor. The height sensor linkage is installed on the front and rear axle Adaptive Front Lighting System Damage Analysis -Adaptive Front Lighting Operation – the adaptive front lighting generally does not operate with the transmission in reverse or at vehicle speeds less than 2 mph. this may vary by vehicle maker. Movement of the headlamps may be restricted at low vehicle speeds, and full movement of the lamps may not be allowed until vehicle speed is greater than about 30 mph. -System Operation – for the adaptive front lighting system to work, the headlamp control module receives information from a variety of sources, such as the: -Engine control module (ECM) -Transmission control module (TCM) -Electronics brake control module (EBCM) -Body control module (BCM) -Steering wheel angle sensor -Headlamp switch status -Transmission gear selection -Speed sensor -Note: The headlamp control module calculates the headlamp angle and sends commands to the left and right headlamp actuators, while the direction the headlamps move is controlled by the steering wheel angle sensor. Also, the headlamp actuators drive the headlamps to the position commanded by the headlamp control module -Automatic Vertical Alignment – for the automatic vertical alignment of the headlamp system to function, the: -Leveling sensors send an output to the headlamp leveling controllers as the vehicle suspension compresses and rebounds -Controllers calculate the difference in vehicle pitch and send a command to the high-intensity discharge (HID) ballast -HID ballast drives the headlamp leveling actuators to the position commanded by the controllers. The headlamp leveling system also monitors the performance of the HID bulb and ballast. -Adaptive Front Lighting Damage Analysis – when checking for damage to adaptive front lighting systems, check for: -Physical damage to the headlamp assembly -Damaged sensors -Damaged motors -Note: An initialization procedure may be required when parts are replaced. The headlamp control module monitors the headlamp actuator motor control circuits for proper circuit continuity and for shorts to ground or proper voltage. If a malfunction is detected, a diagnostic trouble code (DTC) will be stored in memory and the driver will be notified with a message displayed on the driver information center (DIC). If a fault is detected, the system will default to setting the headlamps to a straight-ahead position. Damage Analysis of Lighting and Vision Assist (2/3) High Beam Assist Description -High beam Assist – high beam assist systems automatically turn the high beams on and off to ensure the best headlight setting for illumination of the road ahead regardless of whether you are driving on highway, a country highway, or in the city. Automatic high beam assist system may: -Detect approaching vehicle headlamps and turn off high beams -Detect a preceding vehicle’s tail lamps and turn off high beams -Monitor the outside light and turn off high beams, if it is bright enough that the high beam headlamps are not required -High Beam Assist Part Locations – high beam assist systems use a forward-facing camera that detects light color, intensity, and movement. The camera is typically located near the interior rearview mirror High Beam Assist Damage Analysis -High Beam Assist Damage Analysis – when performing damage analysis of high beam assist systems, it will be necessary to check for DTCs set by the electronic control unit (ECU). Therefore, a maker-approved scan tool will be required. When servicing high beam assist systems, it is important to always reference vehicle maker service information to obtain testing procedures and service requirements. An initialization procedure may be required after part replacement. Damage Analysis of Lighting and Vision Assist (3/3) Night View Assist System Description -Night View Assist Systems – night vision assist systems extend the perception of the driver beyond the reach of the headlights through the use of thermo-graphic cameras, infrared lights, head up display, and other technologies -Overview – night vision assist systems are broken into two categories: active and passive. Active systems use infrared light sources to illuminate the darkness, while passive systems rely on thermal radiation that is emitted from cars, animals, and other potential hazards. Both systems rely on infrared data, but utilize the data differently -System Functionality – Night-view assist systems: -May use far-infrared technology, which detects heat emitted from objects. This type of technology may be referred to as thermal imaging. -May use near-infrared technology. Night vision enhancement systems that use this technology require special infrared “floodlamps” to project infrared light onto the surrounding area. The projected light is similar to what is used for many household remote controls -Are activated when the low beam headlamps are on -May detect objects a set distance ahead in darkness. One system can detect objects nearly 500 feet in front of the vehicle. -When activated, display the images on a black-and-white screen in the instrument panel or console -Black-and-White Systems – some systems provide the driver with a black-and-white image of the driving environment ahead of the vehicle in the control display or central information display. This system uses far-infrared technology without active infrared illumination. It essentially converts thermal radiation into electronic signals. The sensor elements alter the resistance in proportion to the temperature. The higher the temperature, the higher the signal, creating a whiter pixel. This system also: -Shows objects ahead in varying degrees of brightness depending on the temperature of these objects -Provides a warning in the head-up display and the central information display -Has a heater element on the inside of the protective window to prevent the camera lens from misting over or freezing up -Night View Assist System Operation – -In order for the night view assist system to be active: -The sensor must detect proper lighting conditions -The ON button must be pressed -Speed parameters must be met. For example, some systems cannot activate if vehicle speed is below 9 mph. -Other common considerations include: -The system can be restricted by environmental conditions, such as heavy rain and snow or extreme temperatures. -The daytime running lights must be switched off -Night View Assist System Parts – night view assist system parts may include: -The night vision camera -IR Floodlamps located near the headlamps -A control module beneath the instrument cluster -A video switch on the instrument panel -A washer jet for the camera lens -A sensor system -Note: The night vision camera may be mounted on or behind the grille, or located inside the passenger compartment near the windshield. These are normal halogen bulbs, equivalent to ordinary high-beam headlamps, but they use filters to prevent visible light rays from passing through. IR floodlamps are only used for near-infrared night vision systems. Night View Assist System Damage Analysis -Night View Assist System Damage Analysis – when checking the night view assist system for damage: -Note that the camera on some systems is located on or behind the grille. This area is subject to damage -Note that IR Floodlamps may be mounted to the bumper cover. There may not be specific aiming procedures for IR floodlamps, but deformed bumpers should be repaired or replaced to ensure that they are pointed in the proper direction. -There may be a protective cover over the camera lens that can be replaced -Camera replacement or alignment may require a vehicle maker-specific scan tool -System defects are displayed on the message center -Note: Always reference vehicle maker service information to identify necessary calibrations and initializations following camera replacement or system service Damage Analysis of Restraint Systems (1/2) Restraint System Damage Analysis Damage Analysis Overview -Restraint System Overview – restraint systems are designed to protect vehicle occupants during a collision. Examples of these systems include: -Airbags -A collapsible steering column -Head restraints -Roll bars -Seat belts -Seat belt pre-tensioners -Note: The Collision Repair Industry has an obligation to correctly repair the customers vehicle to ensure these systems will perform as designed in the event of another collision. All restraint system repairs must be performed in compliance with vehicle maker repair procedures and requirements. Repairs must also be completed using OEM-approved replacement parts and materials -Inspection Safety Precautions – it is important to take certain precautions before or during inspection of airbags and other safety restraint system (SRS) parts. These precautions include: -Disabling the restraint system to prevent accidental deployment -Wearing the proper personal protective equipment -Avoiding biohazards -Cleaning up broken glass -Ensuring airbags are deployed before disposing -Disable the Restraint System – before beginning repairs on any restraint systems, it is critical to first review vehicle maker service information. Be sure to follow the system disabling procedures to ensure the system has been completely discharged. Even if an airbag looks fully deployed, it may capable of a second deployment -Wear Protective Equipment – the powdery residue present after front airbag deployment may contain a small amount of sodium hydroxide, which may irritate the eyes, nose, mouth, or throat. Protective equipment that may reduce the chance of skin contact may include nitrile gloves, safety glasses or goggles, and a long-sleeved shirt -Avoid Biohazards – biohazards, such as blood and other body fluids, may be potentially infectious. Bloodborne pathogen training is required to clean up or work around blood spills. Always wear personal protective equipment when working around blood. This may include rubber gloves, and eye and respiratory protection -Clean Broken Glass – when analyzing interior damage, broken glass should be cleaned up prior to entering the vehicle to begin the damage analysis process. This will help to protect against personal injury or causing additional damage to upholstery -Ensure Airbags are Deployed – some airbags have two igniters. Depending on the severity of the collision, the igniters may be designed to fire simultaneously, milliseconds apart, or only one may fire. This may require manual deployment before disposing of the airbag module. Vehicle-specific service information must be referenced for safe handling and disposal procedures for deployed airbags, and recommended steps to ensure that the second stage is deployed -System Identification – to ensure an accurate estimate, it is important to identify what restraint systems the vehicle is equipped with and which systems have deployed. Check the airbags, seat belts and pre-tensioners, and warning lamp -Airbags – it is important to identify the number and location of airbags equipped on the vehicle, as well as the number that have deployed. It is also recommended that the vehicle maker service information be reviewed to identify the locations of all SRS components before starting the damage analysis process. Airbag locations may also be identified with the SRS acronym printed on a tag or label, or embossed on an interior trim panel. Deployed airbags are noticeable as they will protrude from the airbag module -Seat Belts and Pre-Tensioners – a thorough inspection of the seat belt assemblies, including retractors, buckles, anchors, and height adjusters, may be necessary to determine deployment. Inspect for damage to adjacent parts, as seat belt pre-tensioners may damage trim panels during deployment. Some seat belt pre-tensioners may require the use of a scan tool to determine deployment -Airbag Warning Lamp – an airbag warning lamp that remains lit may indicate that restraints have deployed. If this is the case, airbags, sensors, modules, occupant classification system (OCS) components, and other SRS components may need to be inspected further to determine deployment -Information Sources – to ensure an accurate estimate, it is important to identify what restraint systems the damaged vehicle is equipped with and the required replacement parts. In addition to vehicle maker websites, vehicle-specific required replacement and inspection items can be obtained from various information sources, including: -ALLDATA, which provides service information for most vehicle makes and models -Computerized estimating systems -I-CAR, using the OEM restraints system part replacement search -Restraint System Servicing – damaged or deployed restraint systems almost always set a diagnostic trouble code (DTC). However, it is important to remember not all DTC’s will turn on a malfunction indicator lamp (MIL). Therefore, the first step when servicing vehicle restraint systems should be performing a system scan using a vehicle maker approved scan tool. This will allow you to retrieve stored DTCs, perform system diagnostics, and may help identify damaged system components that may not have visible signs of damage. It is also important to remember that any services performed on the restraint system will likely result in the need to calibrate the system and may require programming of the module, if replaced. Seat Belt Systems -Seat Belt System Inspection – following a collision, seat belt parts should be inspected. These parts include the: -Belt buckle -Warning lamp -Webbing -Anchoring -Retractor -Emergency locking retractor -Automatic locking retractor -Note: In addition, vehicle seats and head restraint systems should be inspected as well -Buckle Inspection – when inspecting the belt buckle, ensure an audible click is heard when the tongue is inserted, and the seat belt remains buckled. Check the buckle for cracks or a loose release button. Notice the amount of pressure required to release the tongue. Excessive pressure is not normal. Look for indications of stress such as deformation or flaking of chrome. These things are not normal and indicate buckle damage -Warning Lamp Inspection – when inspecting seat belt buckles, verify that the seat belt warning lamp is operating properly. A seat belt buckle that is not functioning properly may cause the seat belt warning lamp to remain lit. the seat belt warning lamp should turn off when the driver seat belt is buckled. Some vehicles have an OCS that requires verifying that the seat belt warning lamp turns off when the passenger seat belt is buckled. In these vehicles, the seat belt warning lamp is designed to light when the passenger seta belt is unbuckled while the passenger seat is occupied -Webbing Inspection – the entire seat belt webbing and retractor assembly may require replacement if damaged or worn. Seat belt webbing should be fully extended and inspected for: -Tears, cuts, or broken threads -Signs of stretching or bowing -Visible seat belt replacement warning or indicator labels -Stains -Cigarette burns or other types of burn damage -Deterioration -Note: Seat belt webbing inspection may require determining whether or not damage is related to the collision. Stains on seat belt webbing should not be cleaned using solvents. The accident-related damage listed above will require webbing replacement -Anchoring Inspection – seat belt anchors should be inspected for damage and potential replacement. Common locations for seat belt anchors include the pillars, outside seat frame rail, and floor pan areas. Always refer to vehicle-specific service information to determine the required inspected or replacement recommendations -Anchor Mounts – anchor mounts should be inspected for cracks and distortion of the mounting locations. This includes the mounting location for retractors, D-rings, and the height adjuster. Inspect the panel flange areas of the mounting locations for damaged spot welds. Damaged spot welds located near the anchoring point may create a weak link and may affect the function of the seat belt system -Anchoring Bolts – anchoring bolts should be inspected for cracks, distortion, or looseness. Inspect for dirt and corrosion. Although dirt may be cleaned, corroded parts should be replaced. Seat belt assembly mounting bolts should be replaced with the seat belt assembly -Replacement Considerations – never replace individual parts that should be replaced as an assembly. Dismantling and only using parts of a seat belt assembly may comprise the safety of the vehicle occupants in future collisions. Refer to vehicle-specific service information for replacement procedures, such as torque specifications and mandatory replacement items or calibrations -Retractor Inspection – check for proper extension and retraction of the webbing. If the action is not smooth and easy, inspect for: -Twisted webbing -Dirt or other contamination on the webbing or in the retractor housing -Proper movement at the anchor mounts -ELR Inspection – the operation of the emergency locking retractor (ELR) should also be inspected. The retractor should lock the seat belt when it is pulled out quickly or when the retractor is tilted. Follow vehicle maker recommendations for testing the proper operation of the ELR. An improper ELR function may require replacement of the seat belt and retractor assembly -ALR Inspection – the automatic locking retractor (ALR) function of the seat belt can be used to secure a child safety seat. It must be tested for proper operation. To test the operation of an ALR: -1) Pull the seat belt all the way out of the retractor -2) Allow the seat belt to retract into the retractor slowly. This typically causes an audible clicking sound -3) At regular intervals, pull on the seat belt with normal force with the intention of extracting it from the retractor. The belt should lock up -4) if the seat belt does not lock up at any point, replace the retractor -Note: Although used to secure a child safety seat, the ALR function may be found on all seats with the exception of the driver seat. The operation of an ALR is similar for most vehicles -Seat Inspection – following a collision, it is important to inspect any seats occupied during the collision for damage including: -Seat frames -Springs -Foam -Seat covers -Reclining mechanisms -Seat tracks -Head Restraint Systems – head restraint systems are designed to aid in protection from whiplash injury resulting from rear collision. Types of head restraints include: -Adjustable, which require manual adjustment to achieve a good geometry to aid in reducing whiplash from a rear collision -Reactive, which use mechanical linkages to reposition the restraint up and forward based on pressure from the occupants torso -Proactive, which automatically move the head restraint up and forward when a collision occurs -Note: Always refer to vehicle maker service information to identify mandatory replacement items related to collision-damaged seats and head restraints systems. Some head restraints have vehicle maker approved procedures to reset or re-arm head restraints while other systems may require replacement after being deployed Seat Belt Pre-Tensioners -Seat Belt Pre-Tensioner Inspection – inspect seat belt pre-tensioners to determine if they have been deployed. The conditions under which seat belt pre-tensioners deploy vary depending on the system. Deployment of the seat belt pre-tensioner may occur when the airbags deploy or during minor collisions with no airbag deployment. A scan tool may be required to determine deployment of some rear seat belt retractors, as they may not lock up after deployment -Warning Lamp – inspect the vehicles instrument panel for illuminated warning lights. Seat belt pre-tensioner deployment may cause the seat belt or airbag warning lamps to illuminate -Retractor – the seat belt may lock up following deployment of the seat belt pre-tensioner. Rough operation or grinding noises may indicate a deployed pre-tensioner -Belt Buckle Assembly – a shortened buckle assembly may indicate a deployed pre-tensioner. For this type of system, it may also be helpful to compare a suspected deployed seat belt pre-tensioner with one that is known to not have deployed. A front passenger seat belt pre-tensioner may not deploy if the seat belt was not in use during the collision -Other Deployment Considerations – inspecting the adjacent parts may be useful when determining if a seat belt pre-tensioner has deployed. A seat belt pre-tensioner may damage trim panels during deployment. In addition, check all rear seat belt assemblies after any airbag deployment. Rear seat belts may be equipped with built-in seat belt pre-tensioners. In some instances, the rear seat belt assemblies are not equipped with seat belt use sensors; therefore, the SRS module may deploy all rear seat belt pre-tensioners with an airbag deployment -Replacement Considerations – it is vital to replace any deployed seat belt pre-tensioners, even if the seat belt retractor seems to be operating properly. Seat belt retractors that lock up when deployed may unlock when removed from the vehicle. This does not mean that it can be reinstalled Roll Bars -Pop-Up Roll Bars – pop-up roll bars and roll bar parts with physical damage must be replaced. Surface imperfections, such as scratches or blemishes, may be refinished as long as there is no damage affecting the integrity and operation of the part. Some pop-up roll bars may be reset if there is no damage. Resetting pop-up roll bars may require a special tool or may be as simple as pushing them back down into place. Some hydraulic roll bars are lowered by pressing a switch o the vehicle instrument panel. A MIL may indicate a malfunction with the pop-up roll bar system -Stationary Roll Bars – inspection of stationary roll bars should include: -Evaluating the structure of the vehicle where the roll bar is attached -Replacing damaged mounting hardware and fasteners -Inspecting the roll bar and mounting areas for damage -Note: Although some vehicle makers may allow refinishing, do not repair damaged stationary roll bars Damage Analysis of Restraint Systems (2/2) Airbag System Damage Analysis Front Driver Airbag -Driver Airbag Inspection and Damage Analysis – the driver airbag system has many parts that will require inspection and damage analysis, including: -Airbag module -Clock spring -Clock spring wiring -Steering column -Knee bolster -Knee bolster airbag -Clock Spring – the clock spring may require replacement following deployment. If the vehicle maker does not require replacement of the clock spring, it must still be inspected for damage. Damaged parts must be replaced. Inspect for: -Heat damage to the coil housing or electrical connectors -A broken ribbon wire, which provides an electrical connection to the airbag and steering wheel -Damaged electrical connectors, such as broken terminals and corrosion -Note: The system scan, performed prior to starting the damage analysis process, may have identified DTCs indicating a problem with SRS or other circuits to the steering wheel. This can aid in the damage analysis process. Damaged airbag system components require replacement. Consult vehicle maker service information to identify all required replacement items and services following an airbag deployment -Steering Column – steering columns should always be inspected for damage following a collision or airbag deployment. When inspecting the steering column for damage, look for sheared plastic pins or inserts, deformation of steering column brackets, or a tight gap between the steering wheel and steering column cover. It may also be necessary to take measurements of the overall steering column length or between specific points compared to manufacturer specifications. Some vehicle makers mandate replacement of the steering column following airbag deployment. A vehicle may also be equipped with a collapsible brake pedal assembly. This allows the pedals to detach during a moderate-to-severe collision, reducing the risk of trapping the drivers feet, or causing leg or ankle injures. Note: Do not test-drive or release the vehicle to the owner if damage to the steering column is suspected -Knee Bolster and Knee Bolster Airbags – knee bolsters are integral parts of the occupant protection system for frontal impacts. The knee bolster is the lower portion of the instrument panel of a passenger vehicle and are typically padded structures designed to absorb impact by the knees during a frontal collision. Knee bolster airbags act as a replacement to the knee bolster and are designed to inflate, holding the occupants knees safely in place against the lower portion of the seat. Note: Knee bolsters, knee bolster airbags, and system components should be closely inspected for damage and replaced in accordance with vehicle maker service requirements Front Passenger Airbags -Occupant Safety System Inspection – for children, the impact of an airbag inflating at more than 200 mph can cause permanent or deadly injuries. For that reason, OCS using sophisticated computer technology were developed to determine if the passenger is a child or adult, eliminating the need for an on/off switch for airbags -OCS Inspection – when inspecting an OCS for damage, it is important to inspect all seats and OCS components. Remember that the vehicle maker may mandate specific OCS part replacement after a collision. These parts may include the sensor pad, seat cushion foam, control module, or the complete OCS assembly. Do not repair parts of an OFC assembly nor replace individual parts from a new OCS assembly unless directed by the vehicle maker service information. Note: Identifying OCS damage may require the use of a vehicle maker approved scan tool to retrieve DTCs and perform diagnostic tests -OCS Recalibration – always refer to vehicle maker service information to identify OCS calibration requirements following a collision or system service. Calibration is typically done using a vehicle maker-specific scan tool and may require a specific set of weights provided by the vehicle maker -Front Passenger Airbag Replacement Considerations – damage inspection of passenger side front airbag systems is very similar to inspections performed on driver side airbag systems -Vehicle Interior – during deployment, some passenger airbags may cause damage to other related parts, including the instrument panel and the windshield. Damages to the instrument panel resulting from airbag deployment should not be repaired. In some cases, airbag system design may cause the airbag to deflect off the windshield, resulting in damage to the windshield -Airbag Parts – some passenger airbag modules have a built-in cover and may not damage the instrument panel or windshield during deployment. Damaged airbag covers should not be repaired. It is also important to inspect all system wiring harnesses and connectors for charring or heat damage. Any damages found to the wiring or connectors should be repaired or replaced following vehicle maker service requirements Side Airbags -Side Airbag Inspection – when inspecting side airbags, the inspection process will be very similar to the process used for front airbag system damage analysis. Following side airbag deployment, inspect for: -Deployed airbag modules -Interior panel damages, including impact damage, cracks, or deformation -Heat damage to wiring, connectors, modules, and sensors -Misalignment to adjacent parts and panels -Note: Also inspect areas on the vehicle such as sunroofs, plastic door panels, the roof, or movable and stationary glass for damage resulting from the pressure, or force, of an airbag deployment. Following a collision, in addition to replacing deployed airbag modules, the side impact sensors, damaged wiring, and the restraints control module (RCM) may also need to be replaced. Consult vehicle-specific service information for mandatory replacement items and system calibrations Impact and Safing Sensors and Wiring -Sensor Inspection – when inspecting sensors for damage, check for: -Cracked or deformed cases -Bent brackets -Corroded cases, brackets, or connectors -Note: Impact sensor wires or connectors may be cut or crushed in the area of impact. Internal electronic damage will be indicated by a lit airbag warning lamp. Always consult vehicle maker service information to identify mandatory replacement or repair options before performing repairs to any restraint system wiring Restraints Control Module -RCM Inspection – -Some collisions do not deploy any restraints; however, the RCM should be inspected for damage if it is located near the area of damage. When inspecting the RCM, check for: -Case damage -Cut or crushed wires or connectors -Bent mounting brackets -Water damage or corrosion -Refer to vehicle-specific service information for RCM replacement guidelines. Vehicle-specific recommendations may require the RCM to be replaced -After any type of SRS deployment -Only if damaged -After a certain number of deployments -For other reasons called out by the vehicle maker -If a certain code is present -Note: Always wear an electrostatic discharge strap when handling any electronic control module -RCM Programming – when programming a new RCM, transferring data from the original module to the new module may be required. This will require keeping the original RCM on hand until the replacement procedure is complete. Depending on the vehicle, subletting the replacement procedure to a local dealer may be required, as this process may include downloading the RCM programming data from a vehicle maker service information website. This process may involve having a subscription with special dealer access. Note: Performing the RCM programming and/or replacement procedure incorrectly may damage the RCM and require obtaining another new RCM Damage Analysis of Stationary Glass (1/2) Stationary Glass Role -Stationary Glass Role – stationary glass, especially the windshield, is part of the vehicle structure and contributes to the strength of the roof and the pillars. This helps manage collision energy. For example, in a front collision, a urethane-bonded windshield helps direct energy around the A-pillar and over the roof, away from the passenger compartment. Stationary glass must be installed by using the proper procedures, materials, and following the specified cure times. This is important for ensuring that the structural integrity of the glass is maintained. Note: Some vehicles may require special urethane adhesive for stationary glass installation -Retains Occupants – stationary glass also keeps unrestrained occupants inside. Severe injuries or fatalities can occur when occupants are ejected from the vehicle. -Works with Passenger Airbags – another role for the windshield is to work with the passenger airbag. A deploying airbag may use the windshield to deflect the deployment in the proper direction. It may also be rendered ineffective by loosening or forcing the windshield out of the opening if it has been installed incorrectly -Structural Role of Stationary Glass – this video explores how stationary glass plays a part in transferring collision energy, and keeping passengers safe Types of Stationary Glass -Laminated or Tempered Glass – there are two types of glass used in vehicles today. -Laminated Glass – Laminated glass is made of two sheets of glass with a plastic inner layer. It: -Holds together when broken due to inner plastic laminate -May have a thick, PVB layer, which serves as a sound deadener and is called ‘acoustic’ glass -Helps prevent occupants from being ejected from the vehicle during a collision -Is used in all windshields -Is sometimes used for side glass, glass roofs, and back glass -Can be repaired, to a limited extent -Tempered – tempered glass is heat treated to increase impact resistance. The glass is heated to about 1,100 degrees Fahrenheit, and then rapidly cooled. In addition: -It cannot be repaired -It may be brittle, and will shatter if cut, drilled, or ground -It may be layered with two sheets of tempered glass -Shattered pieces are not as sharp as laminated glass slivers -It may be used anywhere but the windshield -If previously damaged or stressed, the glass can shatter at a later time -Breaking Glass – this video briefly shows how laminated glass breaks from an impact versus how tempered glass breaks from an impact -Tinting – OEM glass is often tinted. Common tint colors include: -Blue -Green -Bronze -Gray -Note: Extremely dark tinting that covers the entire glass is called ‘privacy’ glass. Privacy glass can only be used behind the B-pillar because it reduces the driver’s vision if used for the windshield or front door glass -Frit – the frit is the black band around the perimeter of most stationary glass. The frit: -Helps prevent UV rays from deteriorating urethane -Is made of ink and glass -Can be repaired with ink only if it is lightly scratched -Shading – shading on glass is: -The tinted, horizontal band across the top -Used on some windshields -Made by darkening the plastic layer, not the glass -Glass Coding – codes printed on glass indicate that the glass has passed American national Standards (AS). These standards require that the windshield and front seat area allow at 70% visible light. The codes include: -Department of Transportation (DOT) number AS1 code on the windshield -AS2 code on the side glass and backglass -AS3 code for privacy glass -Note: On windshields, the label may be on the bottom middle of the glass -DOT Number – this number is the identifier for the glass part and is required on all documentation. If the replacement glass is defective for some reason, it is the DOT number that is referenced -AS1 Code – the AS1 code is only for the laminated windshield. Besides the 70% light transmittance requirement, AS1 has additional requirements for certain amounts of distortion and a specified penetration resistance. The code is below the top shading, with an arrow pointing down, indicating that the 70% light transmittance standard is met only below the shading. The code also helps glassmakers align the shading on the inner plastic laminate. -AS2 Code – the AS2 code is on side glass and the backglass. The AS2 code is used for both tempered and laminated glass with the exception of the windshield -AS3 Code – the AS3 code is for darkly tinted or privacy glass. AS3 is used for both tempered and laminated glass. If the glass does not meet the 70% light transmittance requirement, it is coded AS3 -Windshield Park Indicators – windshield park indicators are where the windshield wipers should be parked when in a resting position. The indicators are located near the bottom of windshields, and serve as guides for reinstalling the windshield wipers -Encapsulated Glass – encapsulated glass has a polyurethane plastic molding that is installed when the glass is made, and is permanently attached to the edge. Encapsulated glass is designed to help the automated installation of glass on the assembly line, as a robot can simply position the glass in place without a need to install a separate molding. Encapsulated glass can be any glass part, but it is mostly found on side glass and back glass -Encapsulated Glass Considerations – if it is difficult to determine whether the glass is encapsulated, try pulling the molding off when the glass is out of the vehicle. If the glass is encapsulated, the molding will not come off the glass when pulled. If it does come off, the molding is either bonded on or a separate molding. Some makers use a pre-applied adhesive system, which has a layer of urethane applied to the glass when the glass is made. When the replacement glass is installed, an activator is applied to the pre-applied urethane before adding another layer of urethane just before the installation -Trim and Moldings – exterior trim or moldings may surround stationary glass. The molding that surrounds the windshield may be T-shaped, sometimes called push-in moldings -Added Features and Integrated Accessories – there are features and accessories being added to glass every model year. Some accessories may be attached to or integrated with the glass. Examples of accessories related to stationary glass include: -A telecommunications system antenna -The radio antenna -The rain sensors -The defroster grids on the backglass and the windshield -Features in the rearview mirror -Forward-facing cameras -The head-up display. A head-up display reflects projected images, such as a speedometer, onto the windshield and requires a special type of glass -Ordering Glass – a stationary glass part can be ordered by calling a parts department at a dealership and asking for the glass part by the vehicle make, model, year, and VIN. Features of the glass, such as tint, shading, and special attachments, also need to be specified, as each feature gets a different number. There is also a standard code and numbering system for ordering replacement glass from glassmakers. The code and number for each type of glass are created by National Auto Glass Specifications (NAGS), and are copyrights of NAGS. The codes and numbers are listed in NAGS catalogs, calculators, and in the NAGS database GLASSMATE. Types of Stationary Glass Adhesive -Glass Installation Considerations – glass replacement is often a sublet operation that is done by professional glass installers. Following installation, the vehicle must sit stationary while the glass adhesive cures. The adhesive must reach full strength before the vehicle is allowed to leave the repair facility. This ensures the integrity of the upper structure in the event of a rollover, and may be used to deflect passenger side airbags during a deployment. Note: Cure times depend on temperature and humidity levels, but generally take several hours. This is important to note when informing the customer on when they can expect their vehicle repairs to be complete -Glass Urethane Adhesive – urethane adhesive specifically made for stationary glass installation helps maintain the structural integrity of the installed glass and vehicle, and has the consistency of tire rubber. When pulled laterally from lap shear, urethane adhesive has a strength of 500-1,200 psi, which is much stronger than other adhesives and sealants. Lap shear is one of the forces that a windshield is subjected to in a collision. Urethane adhesives may also have unique characteristics, such as a requirement to be non-conductive, as some glass adhesives contain carbon, which can be reactive with aluminum and cause galvanic corrosion -Moisture-Cure vs. Fast-Cure – urethane adhesives generally cure from the outside-in. after a stated minimum time, there will be an outer skin that holds the glass to the body, but there will still be a liquid center. If a cut is made through a bead of moisture-cure adhesive and fast-cure adhesive after a few hours, the fast-cure adhesive will show an outer skin with a liquid center, and the moisture-cure adhesive will show no outer skin beginning to form - Moisture-Cure on left. Fast-Cure on right -Minimum Driveaway Time – minimum driveaway time is the time from adhesive application until the product reaches full strength. There is a time specification that the glass industry has agreed on when a vehicle that has had stationary glass replacement can be released to the customer. Driveaway time for fast-cure products may be as little as 30-60 minutes. For conventional moisture-cured products, it may be 2-8 hours, or longer. The shortest driveaway time for moisture-cured products is based on 75 degrees Fahrenheit and 50% relative humidity. Lower temperature and/or humidity requires a longer time. The time will be specified on the performance data sheet that comes with the product. Note: Some vehicle makers have specific recommendations regarding stationary glass installation. Information regarding driveaway times and full cure times should be communicated to the vehicle owner -Foam Tape – open-cell foam tape should be replaced if it was used in the original installation. Foam tape serves primarily for sound deadening, as foam reduces wind noise, and vibration around the glass. If it is not replaced, the vehicle will has a different sound as it travels along the road, resulting in customer comeback. Foam also helps provide the look of a finished installation, as the clean line, is more aesthetic than an uneven bead of urethane when viewing it from inside. Foam tape is available in two sizes: 6mm and 7mm. several vehicle makers use foam tape, and provide recommendations for the proper size. Note: Foam-core butyl must be replaced with the same product. Do not substitute butyl tape for foam-core butyl -Types of Adhesive Failures – when an adhesive is put under stress, there are two ways it can fail. Adhesive failure is when the adhesive pulls loose from the surface it is bonded to. Cohesive failure is when the body of the adhesive pulls apart. A cohesive failure is often due to an adhesive being used after its expired shelf life. This can also cause adhesive failure. During testing, there must be cohesive failure, not adhesive failure -Adhesive is the black line in-between the glass -Causes of Adhesive Failures – when the adhesive pulls loose from the surface it was bonded to, there could be a number of reasons, including: -Contamination on one of the bonding surfaces -Corrosion on the pinch weld flange -Ambient conditions during installation, such as freezing temperatures -Material incompatibility. All products used should be from the same maker -Expired products Damage Analysis of Stationary Glass (2/2) Types of Damage -Stationary Glass Damage Analysis – -When checking stationary glass for damage, look for visible damage. This includes damage to: -Trim and moldings -The integrated radio antenna -The defroster grid. Damaged defroster grids may be repairable -The interior side of the glass caused by mass inertia -Cracks, pits, scratches, and leaks are also signs of damage to check for. Some types of minor damage are repairable, as long as the damage is not in the drivers line of sight. Note: Stationary glass will often require removal when repairing or replacing adjacent panels -Signs of Water Leaks – moisture at the interior seams may indicate hidden damage to the urethane adhesive. Repairing the leak may require removal and reinstallation of the glass. Corrosion on the interior surface of the pinch weld flange is another indication of a water leak -Delamination – delamination may appear as white streaks or spots and cannot be repaired. If it is determined that the delamination was preexisting, it should be communicated to the customer -Fire Damage – stationary glass that has been exposed to fire may require replacement. Excessive heat may weaken the urethane adhesive that holds the glass, as well as the inner plastic laminate. Delamination may cause large pieces of glass to come loose and injure the occupants during another collision. Cracks or warpages of the glass also may indicate that it has been exposed to excessive heat Stationary Glass Repair vs. Replace Considerations -Glass Repairability – the decision to repair or replace damaged glass will depend on the type of glass. Only some minor scratches can be repaired on tempered glass. Minor repairs are defined as repairs to scratches that cannot be felt with a fingernail. These may be able to be buffed out. Windshields are made of laminated glass. Repairs to laminated glass may include bullseyes, star beaks, and some small cracks. However, repairs are only possible if the damage is contained to the outer laminate or if the damage is not located in the drivers direct view -Glass Defects – defects in stationary glass, usually on the edge of laminated glass, include: -Chips in one of the outer laminates -Lamination separation, indicated by white streaks or spots -Burrs, or raised bumps -Distortion, due to uneven layers -Dirt of hair between the laminations -Gaps in bonded moldings -Note: This is a delamination problem within the glass and cannot be repaired -Laminated Glass Repair – key points regarding laminated glass repair include that repairs are only possible if the damage is contained to the outer layer of glass. Repairs cannot be made in the drivers direct view – this is generally the area covered by the driver side windshield wiper. This type of repair is possible because the visible damage is mostly air trapped between the outer layer of glass and the plastic laminate. The air can be drawn out and replaced with resin (making the damage nearly invisible) and the damage is still present after the repair, but not as visible without the trapped air Stationary Glass Installation and Calibration -Determining Calibrations – many vehicles include equipment for advanced driver assist systems (ADAS), such as cameras and radars that may need to be reset or calibrated if glass is replaced, or even just removed and reinstalled. Therefore, it is crucial to always refer to the makers service procedures and requirements when replacing stationary glass. Failure to properly reset or calibrate this equipment can cause the following ADAS systems to malfunction: -Lane Departure systems -Dynamic cruise control -Collision avoidance systems -Automatic high beam systems -Rain sensors -Document the Installation – stationary glass must be installed correctly. An installer, and the facility that contracted an installer, can be held liable if the glass is improperly installed and the vehicle occupant is injured. To prove that the installation was done correctly, document the installation -Documentation Considerations – when documenting an installation, include the: -Glass part that was replaced -Product makers procedures used -Products used, including the adhesive lot number, primers, cleaners, etc. list of expiration dates, if applicable -Vehicle owner information and vehicle identification number (VIN) -Time when the vehicle was released -Note: Also document the ambient conditions at the installation site, including the temperature and humidity, and whether the glass was replaced inside a facility or outside. List the driveaway time of the adhesive based on these conditions. Be sure to save the installation record. Installation record forms are available in brochures from adhesive makers Damage Analysis of Steering and Suspension Systems (1/2) Suspension System Damage Analysis Customer Consultation and Visual Inspection -Damage Analysis – damage analysis is achieved by consulting with the customer and conducting visual inspections. In many cases, damage will be obvious. The customer can provide clues to help the estimator focus on where to start the inspection, which may point to less obvious issues. Understanding how to interpret the different types of damage will aid in wiring a complete estimate. Minor damage might not be easily detected and will require additional testing to verify the cause. Some suspension and steering damage may be discovered by performing quick checks, precision measuring, and/or alignment checks -Customer Consultation Information – consult with the customer and gather information that includes a description of the collision, as well as known vehicle concerns. A collision description would include the speed and angle of the collision, whether the vehicle left the road surface, and any secondary collisions such as hitting a curb or large pothole. Other information, such as the size of the other vehicle and the road conditions during the collision, may also be included. Vehicle concerns would include any handling problems and any abnormal noises noticed before or after the collision. Information gathered should include the type of noise made, as well as the perceived location of the noise, and the conditions present when the noise occurs -Vehicle Pulls or Drifts – a customer may indicate the vehicle pulls or drifts after an accident. If the vehicle is drivable and the situation permits, a road test can be done to check for vibration, pulling, an off-center steering wheel, abnormal handling. Be sure to note if the problems occur, or are affected by, acceleration, coasting, turning, or braking. If the vehicle has a pull or drift to one side when driven straight ahead, this could indicate various problems. -Wheel Alignment – common damage causing wheel alignment issues include: -Bent, twisted, or broken steering or suspension parts -Damage to steering or suspension part mounting locations -Structural damage affecting part mounting location or alignment -Shift or movement at mounting locations causing parts to be out of position -Power Steering Problem – while not common, power steering problems can cause a pull or drift under acceleration. To verify if a pull is caused by a power steering problem, raise the front wheels off the ground pointing straight ahead, and increase the engine RPM. Watch for a toe change of the front tires – there should be none. Internal leaks in the power steering gear valve may send more pressure to one side of the gear and cause a pull. A restriction in a line on the steering gear may cause unbalanced pressure, resulting in a pull. Note: Vehicles with electric power steering may require scanning, sensor calibration, updated programming, or other service to correct pull/drift concerns -Abnormal Noises – abnormal noises can be classified into different categories. Types of noises include clunking or rattling, clicking, and rumbling. -Clunking or rattling noises may indicate loose fasteners or bushings were steering or suspension parts attach to the chassis. If a bushing is loose in a part, it can cause unwanted movement where it attaches to the vehicle. Other causes of clunks include loose ball sockets on tie rods and ball joints, and part interference during suspension deflector -Clicking noises may indicate interference problems or problems with parts that have a rotational movement -Rumbling or squealing sounds are typically caused by bearings or power steering problems -Note: Test equipment is available that utilizes clip-on microphones to allow listening to wheel bearings and other parts suspected of making noise -Visual Inspection Overview – a visual inspection includes: -Looking in the area of impact. Think about damage based on the angle and speed of the collision -Observing the positions of the wheels in relation to each other, the steering wheel, and the wheel openings -Checking for visible impact marks on the wheel and tire assemblies -Looking for ride height differences from side to side, or front to back -Inspecting for damage of the vehicle structure at any steering or suspension part mounting locations -Note: Look for symmetry in relation to how the vehicle sits and the position of the wheels and tires. If there are any unrelated or wear/service-related concerns, this should be documented and communicated to all parties involved. Inspect the vehicle with the estimating system at the vehicle. When inspecting/writing the estimate, inspect each part in the steering/suspension system to ensure nothing is overlooked -Quick Checks – steering and suspension system quick checks may only verify that a problem exists. Quick checks may not pinpoint the exact cause of a problem or condition, but may lead or point to more advanced testing in order to find which part is damage. Quick checks typically requires minimal or no tools and equipment. An example of a quick check that can be done with no tools is using your fingers to gauge the distance between a tire and wheel opening. Additionally, they may be done with minimal or no vehicle disassembly. Note: Use a bright flashlight, inspection mirror, and camera to inspect for and document damage Tire, Wheel, and Suspension Inspection -Tire Inspection – tires should be inspected for: -Blowouts, cuts, abrasion, or missing pieces -Bulges in the sidewall or tread area indicating separation of plies or belt damage -Flat spots or unusual wear patterns -Tire bead damage at the rim interference -Note: Custom tires and wheels may result in ride height and alignment measurements different from the original specifications. Many vehicles have a doorframe label that will identify the factory-recommended tires and wheels. Road force balance equipment can help identify tire issues that may not be visually detectable -Tire-Related Pull – to verify that a pull or drift is caused by a tire problem, switch the left and right front tires from side to side. If the pull is tire-related, the side that the vehicle pulls toward will also switch. Uneven tire air pressure from side to side will cause a vehicle to pull to the side with the lowest pressure. Verify that the air pressure in the tires is correct before switching sides. Note: Verify if the spare tire is on the vehicle, and the condition of the removed tire and wheel. -Tire Wear – tire wear that is uneven can be used as a diagnostic tool. Uneven tire wear will typically take time to show up and may indicate that the problem has existed for a period of time. Note that all-wheel drive/four-wheel drive vehicles may have specific tire diameter tolerance requirements due to differentials and/or viscous couplings that are designed to allow momentary differences in wheel speeds when the vehicle turns a corner or spins a tire. If the differentials or viscous couplings are forced to operate 100% of the time because of mismatched tires, they may experience unwanted wear and may eventually fail. Note: When inspecting tire wear, knowing which problems that specific tire wear patterns might indicate may be helpful in reducing damage analysis cycle time -Left is diagnol wear. Right is full shoulder wear. Bottom is feathered or sawtoothed wear -Alignment Problems – tire wear may indicate alignment problems if the wear is not consistent across the tread surface. For example, a tire with a feathered or sawtoothed wear pattern going across the tread in one direction may be the result of out-of-specification toe. When toe wear is present, it will likely be present on both tires on the same axle. This is because toe on one side will affect the wear on the other side. In another example, a tire with excessive inner tread wear pattern or outer tread wear pattern may be the result of out-of-specification camber. Camber wear may only be on one tire -Left is full shoulder wear. Right is feathered or sawtoothed wear -Shocks, Springs, or Balance – tire wear may indicate problems with struts/shocks or springs. Weak struts/shocks or springs, or out-of-balance tires, will typically cause a cupping wear pattern on a tire. Cupping may also be the result of bent suspension parts. Cupping is when the tire wears in patches or creates bald spots on the tread surface, usually around the edge of the tread on one side or the other side of the tire. -Inflation-Related Wear- a thin or worn tread wear pattern around the tire edges may be the result of under inflation. A thin or worn tread wear pattern around the center of the tire may be the result of over inflation. A patchy flat spot tread wear pattern around the tire may be the result of an out-of-balance tire and wheel -Wheel Inspection – wheels should be checked for: -Cosmetic damage. Repairable wheel damage is generally limited to minor scratches or nicks that can be sanded and refinished -Missing lug nuts and bent or broken studs -Bent wheel studs, which require removal of the lug nuts and wheel -Cracks -Broken bead edges, which may be found on aluminum wheels -Bent wheel centers, which can be found by doing a lateral runout check -Bent rims or bead edges, which can be identified with a radial runout check -Missing balance weights. An unbalanced tire may cause the vehicle to have a vibration when -Note: If tire and or wheel damage is evident, the hub and wheel bearings should be inspected for damage -Tire Pressure Monitors Direct – there are several repair considerations with direct tire pressure monitoring system. First, check for damaged antennas or wiring. Receiving antennas are located in areas susceptible to collision damage. Repair of the antenna wiring harness is not recommended. Another consideration is that electronic malfunctions will require a scan tool for diagnosis. Next, replacing damaged sensors. The valve stem core and cap have a special design and function as the sensor antenna. Replacing them with valve stem cores and caps from conventional valve stems causes radio signal interference and a system malfunction. Replace the sensor if the correct valve stem core or cap is not available. Lastly, do not use tire sealers. Tire sealers can clog the pressure sensor and cause a system malfunction. Note: A TPMS scan tool may be required to perform relearn and/or programming if the tire positions are changed on the vehicle and/or replacement sensors are installed -Tire Pressure Monitors Indirect – indirect tire pressure monitoring collision repair includes the following issues: -No new or added sensors or electronics are used in the systems -The ABS MIL will typically be lit if a system problem is detected -Scan tools are typically required for system diagnosis and to retrieve DTCs. DTC-based repair flowcharts are typically available in vehicle service manuals for repairing electronic system problems -Wheel Runout Quick Check – wheel runout may be difficult to detect with only the use of your eyes. However, with a minimum of tools, it can easily be checked. When inspecting wheels, look at all wheels. Do not forget the inboard side of the tires and wheels. -Ride Height Difference – inspect the vehicle for visible differences in ride height from side to side or front to rear. -Measuring Ride Height - ways of measuring ride height include measuring from the ground up to specified points on the chassis. It should be done with a level surface with the wheels pointed straight ahead. Or, it may require measuring between suspension parts and reference points on the chassis. This method may identify a weak spring or possible bent part as the cause of the ride height problem. Tire size and pressure, as well as vehicle load, can affect height. Note: Having a location that is pre-determined to be level, for making measurements that need to be done from a level surface, can help to reduce damage analysis cycle time -Causes of Ride Height Problems – causes of ride height problems include: -Structural damage -Damaged springs -A bent strut or shock absorber -Bent control arm(s) -Note: ride height specifications may be found in alignment equipment manuals or vehicle maker service information. Custom suspension parts and wheels/tires, as well as chassis modifications, may affect ride height. A damaged sway bar may cause a ride height issue. Sway bars are made of spring steel and are not easily damaged, but can be in some situations. Inspect for signs of bending or twisting of the sway bar, as well as damage to end links and mounting brackets. -Jounce and Rebound Check – a jounce and rebound check may identify a bent strut rod, shock absorber shaft, or suspension interference. Compress the suspension at each wheel and look, feel, and listen for travel restrictions or noises. Excessive bouncing on rebound indicates worn struts or shock absorbers. If toe changes when jouncing the vehicle in the front, this is called bumper steer; it is caused by steering linkage that is out of level to the suspension. Jounce both sides of the front at the same time by pushing down on the center of the front end. Excessive toe changes on jounce or rebound may indicate steering linkage damage or misalignment. -Strut and Shock Absorber Inspection – inspect struts and shocks for: -Damage to the housing, shaft, mounting points, or bushings -Oil leaks where the shaft goes into the housing and along the housing itself (minor seepage at the shaft seal is considered acceptable by most OEMs) -Note: Because they affect ride and handling, struts and shocks may nee to be replaced in pairs if a match to the undamaged side cannot be identified or obtained, or if the undamaged side is aged or worn. A worn and new part can react differently and create handling problems. Struts and shocks may have wires, connectors, lines, or hoses that should also be inspected for any damage -Spring Inspection – because they affect ride and handling, springs may need to be replaced in pairs if a match to the undamaged side cannot be identified, obtained, or if the undamaged side is aged or worn. A worn and new part can react differently and create handling problems. The visual inspection criteria for a spring depends on the type of spring being inspected. -Coil Spring – coil springs should be inspected for visible damage such as breaks, cracks, bends, or corrosion. Also, inspect for proper positioning of the spring in the spring seat -Leaf Spring – leaf springs should be inspected for bends, broken eyes, cracks, bushing damage, damage to the mounting brackets and shackles, and movement of the axle on spring. Most leaf springs are steel, some are composite; in both cases, replacement is the only solution if damaged -Torsion Bar – torsion bars should be inspected for damaged or broken adjusting cams, adjustment bolts, control arm engagement, mounting location, or any other visible damage such as bends, cracks, or corrosion -Air and Hydraulic Springs – inspect air and hydraulic springs for any visible damage or signs of leaks. Inspect lines, hoses, fittings, wiring, connectors, pumps, reservoirs (tanks), and valves for damage. Also check the height sensors for any damage and for proper positioning. Some vehicles may have air springs or hydraulics built into the strut assembly and/or electronic control of the suspension system requiring special procedures, tools, and equipment when servicing -Diagnosing a Weak Spring – use the following method to determine which end of a vehicle the bad spring is on: -Using the vehicle chassis, lift the tires on one end of the vehicle off the ground -Measure the ride height to the ground at the end of the vehicle with the tires on the ground. If the spring is located on the end with the tires on the ground, the sag of the vehicle on the side with the bad spring will be exaggerated. -Note: If the bad spring is on the end that is raised, the end on the ground will sit level side to side. Some auto level and electronically controlled suspension systems require disabling before lifting the vehicle to avoid system damage Toe, Caster, and Camber Inspection -Toe Overview – toe is the direction that the front of a tire points in relation to the vehicle centerline. Negative toe is when a tire is pointed away from the vehicle centerline. Positive toe is when a tire is pointed toward the vehicle centerline. A zero toe reading is when the tire is parallel to the vehicle centerline. Total toe references the left and right side tires to each other. Zero total toe is when the left and right tires are parallel. Toe-out would have the front of the tires pointed toward each other -Top is positive toe. Middle is negative toe. Bottom is zero toe. -Total Toe Quick Check – to perform a total toe quick check, raise and support the vehicle so that the tires can be marked in the middle of the tread. With the tires back on the ground, measure the distance between the marks at the front and rear of the tires. Make the measurement at spindle height in both locations. Toe should be measured with the vehicle at ride height. Having the tires on turntables will provide a more accurate measurement. A tram gauge may be required to measure around obstacles. If turntables are not used, roll the vehicle back and forth after lowering the tires back on the ground before measuring. -Total Toe Quick Check (continued) – a total toe quick check includes subtracting the front measurement from the rear measurement. This will give you the total toe as a distance measurement, with a positive number representing toe-in. it compares the measurement to a listed specification to identify a problem. Most vehicles will have a toe specification fairly close to zero with a plus or minus deviation that is acceptable. A total toe quick check only identifies that a toe problem exists, not which side it is on. -Individual Toe Quick Check – to determine which side of the vehicle has damage, the individual toe of each wheel needs to be referenced. One quick check for individual toe includes: -Centering the steering wheel -Inspecting both sides for visual toe-out or toe-in. the undamaged side will have the tire pointed straight ahead with the steering wheel centered -Note: Small differences may not show with a visual inspection and may only be discovered with an alignment check -Problems and Causes of Total Toe – ways to identify which part is damaged and causing the toe problem include: -Knowing the type of steering system -Identifying the damage condition that exists. The damage condition will point to certain parts and rule out others. Some parts can cause a total toe problem when bent and other parts only cause an off-center steering wheel. -Understanding that toe is affected by changes to other alignment angles. If a bent suspension part causes a change to either the SAI, camber, or caster, it will likely cause a toe change -Steering Arm Inspection – steering arms are usually part of the steering knuckle and sometimes the strut housing. They should be inspected for bends. A bent steering arm will typically cause toe to change. Signs of fresh corrosion are another indication that the part may have been bent -Tie Rod/Tie Rod End Inspection – to visually inspect tie rods and tie rod ends: -Compare the suspect part to a known good part -Look for bends that are not designed into the part. Turn the steering wheel and look for interference between the tie rods and other part -Look for deformed or torn grease boots at the ball socket -Inspect for loose ball sockets on tie rod ends along with vertical free play -Steering Arm Quick Check – a quick check to measure a steering arm for damage includes: -Measuring to the center of the tie rod end and to the steering arm using a straightedge placed on the hub or hub surface of the steering knuckle, or to other symmetrical reference points on the steering knuckle; this can help identify steering arm damage and tie rod end damage -Comparing the measurement to the same measurement on the opposite side or that of an undamaged part -Setback and Caster – this section goes over what setback and caster are -What is a Setback? – setback is when a wheel is moved back in the chassis compared to the same wheel on the opposite side of the vehicle. This causes the wheelbase on the side with setback to be shorter than the wheelbase on the opposite side. Setback of a front wheel will typically cause a change in caster for that wheel. The only exception to this would be if both the upper and lower pivot points are pushed back an equal amount. This would cause wheel setback, but no caster change. This is more likely on solid axle front suspension. -What is Caster? – caster is the angle between true vertical and the steering axis when viewed from the side of the vehicle. It is changed whenever the upper or lower pivot points are moved forward or rearward. Moving the lower pivot point results in setback and a caster change. Moving just the upper pivot point changes caster, and usually only has a minor effect on setback. Caster is not an angle that typically causes tire wear. An excessively out-of-specification caster angle will only cause tire wear issues during cornering. Note: If caster is low on one side, it may cause the vehicle to pull to that side -Checking for Setback/Caster – the ways of checking for setback of a front wheel include: -Measuring between the lower ball joint and a symmetrical reference point rearward on the same side of the chassis. Compare to the same measurement on the opposite side of the vehicle -Using a three-dimensional measuring system to compare the location of the left- and right-side lower ball joint centers -A wheel alignment check. Most computerized alignment machines will indicate if there is setback of a wheel -Note: Setback can also be identified by visual inspection, or by inserting your fingers between the tire and wheel opening and comparing to the opposite side -Problems and Causes of Setback and Caster – these charts list the possible causes of setback and caster problems for each suspension type. When inspecting control arms for movement or damage, inspect bushings, ball joints, and attachment points for possible damage Problems and causes of setback -MacPherson Strut and SLA-Style Suspensions – -Structural damage that moves lower control arm mounting points -Bent lower control arm -Shifted suspension cradle -Bent lower ball joint -Solid Axle Suspension – -Structural damage that moves mounting points for axle housing -Bent axle housing -Bent leaf spring -Bent trailing arm -Twin I-Beam Suspension – -Structural damage that moves mounting points for I-Beam -Bent I-Beam -Bent radius rod Problems and causes of caster -MacPherson Strut Suspension – -Setback of front wheel -Structural damage that moves shock tower forward or rearward -SLA-Style Suspension – -Setback of front wheel -Structural damage that moves upper control arm mounting points -Bent upper control arm -Solid Axle Suspension – -Twisting of axle housing that changes upper and lower pivot point relationship -Twin I-Beam Suspension – -Twisting of I-beam that changes upper and lower pivot point relationship -Camber – camber is defined as the inward or outward tilt of the tire at the top compared to true vertical when viewed from the front of the vehicle. Camber is the angle between a line drawn through the center of the tire and true vertical. Camber specifications are given in degrees. It is positive when the tire is leaned out at the top and negative when the tire is leaned in at the top. If camber is out of specification, the vehicle may pull to the side with the most positive camber. Camber is one of the main tire wear angles. Excessive positive camber will wear the outside edge of the tire and excessive negative camber will wear the inside edge of the tire -Steering Axis Inclination (SAI) – steering axis inclination (SAI) is the angle between the steering axis and true vertical when viewed from the front of the vertical. SAI may also be called kingpin inclination. Changing the SAI angle on a vehicle will also change the camber angle of the tire. It can be used as a diagnostic tool when used in conjunction with other alignment angles. SAI may also be affected by structural issues and/or repairs. -How SAI is Measured – SAI can be measured by measuring the structure of the vehicle and comparing the measurement to specifications. Width measurements of the upper and lower pivot points can be made; these may be comparative measurements to symmetrical points on the structure or reference vehicle centerline. If the SAI is correct and there is a camber problem, there is a bent suspension part. SAI can also be measured by a wheel alignment check. Most computerized alignment equipment is capable of measuring the SAI of the front suspension. -Included Angle – included angle is the sum of the camber and SAI angle. If camber is positive, included angle will be larger than SAI, but when camber is negative, included angle will be less than SAI. It is mainly a diagnostic angle used to help identify if parts are bent between the upper and lower suspension pivot points. To identify bent parts, use a straight edge or square and tape measure to make comparative measurements to the opposite side of the vehicle for points on the knuckle, strut housing, and ball joint -Camber out of Specification – if a tire appears to be tipped inward or outward at the top it is considered a camber change. This chart lists the possible causes of a camber change for each suspension type. Problems and causes of Camber -MacPherson Strut Suspension – -Structural damage that misaligns strut tower or lower control arm mounting points -Shifted suspension cradle -Bent strut -Bent lower control arm -Bent steering knuckle -Bent ball joint -Loose wheel bearings -SLA-Style Suspension – -Structural damage that misaligns upper or lower control arm mounting points -Shifted suspension cradle -Bent strut -Bent upper or lower control arm -Bent steering knuckle or spindle -Bent ball joint -Loose wheel bearings -Solid Axle Suspension – -Bent axle housing -Bent axle shaft (rear) -Bent steering knuckle or spindle -Bent ball joint -Twin I-Beam Suspension – -Bent I-Beam -Bent steering knuckle or spindle -Bent ball joint -Camber Quick Check – camber problems can be verified using a camber quick-check gauge. There are a variety of different styles of these gauges available. The gauge may mount to the wheel rim or to the face of the hub. These gauges can be used to verify camber problems when visual methods are not conclusive. Damaged sheet metal can create an optical illusion that the camber of a wheel is incorrect when it is within specification. Measure the camber with the vehicle on a level surface after rolling the vehicle back and forth on the tires. Be careful to not scratch the wheel when attaching the quick-check gauge, especially with aluminum wheels. Note: Smart phone camera level apps ay be helpful to identify camber issues, but should not be relied upon for final verification Wheel Tracking -Thrust Angle – the thrust line is the direction that the rear wheels track. It is the imaginary line that bisects the total rear toe angle of the vehicle. A thrust line pointing to the right will cause a vehicle to pull to the left. This is because the rear of the vehicle will walk to the right, which will cause the front wheels to be pointed to the left. To keep the vehicle going straight, the steering wheel will have to be turned so that the front tires are parallel to the rear tires. Visually inspect the vehicle while following it as it is driven straight ahead. If the rear axle has an excessive thrust angle, one of the front tires will be more visible than the other, or one rear tire will appear closer to the wheel opening lip on the body. Note: Ideally, the thrust line coincides with the centerline of the vehicle -Checking Wheel Tracking – drive the vehicle through water and across a level surface while driving straight ahead. The position of the front tire tracks in relation to the rear tire tracks will indicate a tracking problem. This method will typically not indicate whether it is an axle offset or thrust angle problem. Using something that is saturated with water, such as towels, for the vehicle to drive over to wet the tires may be one way to control excessive spreading of the water and potentially minimize cleanup time. This may help to reduce the damage analysis cycle time -Thrust Angle Quick Check – a thrust angle quick check is done with a length of string and a tape measure -1) Attach the string to a point on the chassis behind the rear tires -2) Stretch the string around the side of the tire at axle height and move it until it contacts the front of the tire -3) Measure from the string inward to two different points on the chassis -4) Repeat steps 1-3 for the opposite side of the vehicle -5) Compare the measurements. Differences in the side-to-side measurements at the same location on the chassis may indicate a tracking problem. If the difference is the same at both measured chassis locations, the tracking problem is caused by axle offset. If the difference in measurements is not the same at both chassis locations, there is a thrust angle problem -Note: This technique can be used on full frame or unitized structure vehicles to help identify toe or tracking problems -Alignment Check – a four-wheel alignment check on the vehicle can help identify issues with the rear suspension. Examining the rear toe angles, thrust angle, and camber measurements can help identify damage conditions. If toe and camber are within specification on one side, but not the other, the issue is likely isolated to one side. If the total toe is within spec, but individual toe angles are out of specification in opposite directions, it may indicate an axle positioning issue or diamond on a full frame vehicle. Close inspection and measurements of the suspension parts, their mounting locations, and the structure of the vehicle should be done. Note: Thrust angle should be near zero, however, vehicles typically gave an allowable tolerance -Causes of Wheel Tracking Problems – improper tracking of the rear wheels may be caused by one of the following issues: -An excessive rear thrust angle – thrust angle problems are the result of rear toe problems and cause an off-center steering wheel when the vehicle is driven straight ahead -Offset of the rear axle – although it will create a tracking problem, axle offset by itself will not cause a dynamically off-center steering wheel as long as the individual rear toe is within specification -Damage or movement of the structure or subframe -Bent suspension parts -Note: Vehicles with rear steering will have additional related parts to inspect and may require special tools and equipment when servicing or aligning the suspension -Left is excessive rear thrust. Orange arrow between orange line and center red line is the thrust line. Right is offset of the rear axle. Thrust line is the orange line and center red line -Thrust Angle Causes – there are two main causes of an excessive thrust angle. -Left image, LT/Rear wheel has positive toe. Orange line is thrust angle. -Rear Toe – one cause of excessive thrust angle is rear toe that is out of specification. If the individual toe of either rear wheel is out of specification, it will typically cause the vehicle to have an excessive thrust angle. An excessive thrust angle will cause a vehicle to pull opposite of the direction that the rear wheels are pointing, and result in an off-center steering wheel to keep the vehicle driving straight ahead -Solid Axle – another cause of excessive thrust angle is a solid axle that is positioned crooked in the vehicle. Causes of a crooked axle include a diamond condition in a full frame, out-of-position mounting points for the axle, or a shifting of the axle on the leaf spring pads. On vehicles with a leaf spring, the mounting point for the front spring eye is what controls axle position. The length position of the rear spring shackles usually has no effect on thrust angle; however, width positioning may. If total toe and or camber is out of specification on a solid axle, it is likely the axle housing is bent and will require replacement. Note that wheel run out may be the result of a bent axle or hub flange. -Axle Offset – axle offset is when the wheel on one side of an axle is positioned closer to the vehicle centerline than the wheel on the opposite side of the axle. It does not affect thrust angle by itself. If the axle is shifted sideways, but there is no individual toe change of the rear wheels, the front and rear wheels will not track correctly to each other, but the vehicle will not pull and the steering wheel will not be off center when driving straight ahead. This is typically caused by a bent track bar (panhard bar), mounting bracket, or other axle positioning part/structural damage Alignment Angles -Wheel Alignment Check – a wheel alignment check can be used as an aid in diagnosing damage to steering and suspension system parts. If used, a wheel alignment check: -Should reference all four wheels, the steering wheel, and all alignment angles -Compares the alignment angles to vehicle maker specifications -Does not include making adjustments to any of the measured angles or replacing parts -Note: Conditions affecting wheel alignment angles may also affect the steering angle sensor and other systems which may require calibration before returning the vehicle to service -Conditions Affecting Wheel Alignment – conditions that affect wheel alignment angles include: -A direct impact to either a tire or wheel -Side collisions that result in a change of wheel position -Vehicle rollovers -Damage to any steering or suspension part or mounting location -Replacement of any steering or suspension part -Movement of the vehicle structure that affects steering or suspension part mounting location -Damage to the structure that affects the steering or suspension -Note: Vehicles that have left the road surface may have steering or suspension damage that is not immediately apparent with a visual inspection. Collision energy transfer through the vehicle can damage suspension parts that are not in the immediate impact zone -Using Alignment Angles – to determine which steering or suspension part is damaged, alignment angle readings can be used to help narrow down the list of possibilities. Look at the SAI, camber, and included angle measurements. Understand the relationship between each of these and the different parts of the suspension system. It can be determined whether or not the damaged part is between the upper and lower pivot points of the suspension. It mush be understood that the type of suspension system will have a bearing on which alignment angles are affected by part damage. Note: Toe angles and thrust angle can help identify damage conditions that affect the direction the tires point. -Suspension Troubleshooting Charts – these diagnostic charts can help to determine which suspension parts may be damaged using SAI, camber, and included angle readings on an alignment report for a specific suspension system -Strut-Style – this diagnostic chart can help to determine which suspension parts may be damaged using SAI, camber, and included angle readings on an alignment report for a strut-style suspension system. For example: if on the alignment report SAI is correct, and camber and included angle are both above specification, then it is most likely a bent knuckle/spindle and/or strut -SLA-Style – this diagnostic chart can help to determine which suspension parts may be damaged using SAI, camber, and included angle readings on an alignment report for an SLA-style suspension system. For example, if on the alignment report SAI is correct, and camber and included angle are both above specification, then it is most likely a bent knuckle/spindle -Solid Axle – this diagnostic chart can help to determine which suspension parts may be damage using SAI, camber, and included angle readings on an alignment report for a front solid axle suspension system. For example: if on the alignment report SAI is correct, and camber and included angle are both above specification, then it is most likely a bent knuckle/spindle. Some solid axle designs will have adjustments for camber that may also change SAI. If the adjustment is at the pivot point, SAI and camber will change together. Caster may also be affected. -Alignment Numbers – a complete alignment report should include caster, camber, toe, SAI, and included angle for the front wheels and toe, thrust angle, and camber for rear wheels. Analyzing all of the numbers together can help identify damage. For example: on a strut-style suspension, if the right front toe is out of specification and the caster reading is low, it is likely the lower control arm is pushed back and/or the mounting area is damaged. The tie rod end and/or steering arm may also be damaged. SAI, camber, and included angle can help identify other possible damage conditions as well. Rear toe, thrust angle, and camber may indicate a problem isolated to one wheel, axle damage, or a position issue. Note: Caster is not typically referenced on the rear suspension Damage Analysis of Steering and Suspension Systems (2/2) Steering System Damage Analysis Steering -Abnormal Steering Effort – abnormal steering effort can include excessive steering effort at any position, or uneven steering effort. If excessive effort is required in all positions, the power steering system should be examined. The effort required to turn the steering wheel should be consistent throughout the full range of steering. Steering effort that increases and decreases as the wheel is turned may indicate a problem in the steering system. Uneven steering effort may be caused by internal steering gear damage such as a bent rack, broken teeth inside the steering gear, or interference between steering parts and other parts of the vehicle. -Steering Wander – causes of steering wander include certain types of wheel alignment problems. Front tires that are not pointing the same direction, or toe misalignment, may cause the vehicle to “hunt” back and forth and follow irregularities in the road surface. Causes may include loose attachment of parts of the steering system. Check for excessive free play in the tie rods and tie rod ends. Steering wander may be caused by loose wheel bearings, unevenly worn tires, or excessive play in the steering gear. Insufficient caster can also cause a vehicle to be unstable at speed and tend to follow road surface irregularities. Note: If caster is low on only one wheel, the vehicle may pull or drift to that side. -Steering Wheel Not Centered – a steering wheel that is not centered statically means that the steering wheel will be off center when the wheels are pointed straight ahead and the vehicle is not moving. A steering wheel that is not centered dynamically would be off center when the vehicle is in motion, being driven straight ahead. Note: If the steering wheel is centered statically, but has to be turned to keep the vehicle straight when driven, inspect the rear toe/thrust angles -Centering the Steering Gear – to center the steering gear: -1) Turn the steering wheel one way until the steering hits the stop -2) Turn the steering wheel back the other way until the steering wheel hits the opposite stop -3) Count the revolutions the steering wheel turned from stop to stop -4) Divide this number by 2 and turn the steering wheel back that many revolutions -Note: After centering the steering gear, the steering wheel should be centered. If the tires are not pointed straight ahead or the steering wheel is not centered, some part of the steering linkage is bent or out of position. If the steering wheel is turned substantially on a vehicle with hydraulic power steering and the pump is not running, it may cause the reservoir to overflow. -Rack Inspection – rack and pinion steering gears should be inspected for: -Noise and binding when the steering wheel is turned – this may indicate a bent or broken rack -Damaged lines, hoses, wires, connectors, sensors, or torn bellows boots -Damage to the steering gear housing, mounting locations, or bushings -Fluid leakage from power steering system parts while the pump is operating -Note: Bellows boots and other external parts of the gear may be serviced separately – damage to the rack and pinion unit generally requires replacement of the assembly -Internal Seal Damage – on power rack and pinion systems, internal seal damage in the rack causes a condition where the steering is stiff when the vehicle is first started, but functions properly after the power steering fluid reaches operating temperatures. Rack and pinion assembly replacement is the repair for this problem -Parallelogram Steering System Inspection – when inspecting a parallelogram steering system, inspect the gear box and mounting locations for damage as well as the center link, tie rod ends, pitman arm, sector shaft, and idler arm. Inspect the ball sockets and attachment points for looseness. Inspect dust boots for improper positioning. The steering linkage should be level in the chassis. Out-of-level steering linkage may be caused by damaged vehicle structure, as well as bent, and/or out of position parts. This may induce bump steer, which causes the vehicle to dart back and forth as it goes over bumps and dips, due to uneven toe changes -Inspecting a Sector Shaft – the sector shaft should be inspected for twisting where the pitman arm attaches to the shaft. A twisted sector shaft can cause off-center steering wheel with no toe change. The splines should be straight if the shaft is undamaged. A twisted sector shaft may be cracked and may completely break apart at a later time, resulting in a loss of steering. The pitman arm should have no movement where it attaches to the sector shaft -Off-Center Steering Problem – an off-center steering problem may be caused by an out-of-position rack and pinion steering gear. If the steering wheel is centered and the front wheels are straight when sitting still, but when drive, the steering wheel has to be held off center to keep the vehicle going straight, this is an indication of a rear wheel toe/thrust angle problem. The front wheels are responsible for steering the vehicle, but the rear wheels are responsible for proper vehicle tracking. Note: A diamond condition on a full frame vehicle may be the cause of a dynamically off-center steering wheel. -Problems and Causes of Off-Center Steering (Static) – this chart shows the types of damage that can cause a statically off-center steering wheel in parallelogram and rack and pinion steering systems. Problems and Causes of Off-Center Steering (Static) -Rack and Pinion Steering – -Shifted suspension cradle -Out-of-position rack and pinion -Parallelogram Steering – -Twisted sector shaft -Bent idler arm -Bent pitman arm -Out-of-position steering gear -Steering Wheel Inspection – check for a bent steering wheel. A bent steering wheel will wobble when it is turned. Some steering wheels are asymmetrical by design. Listen for abnormal noises when turning the steering wheel. Inspect all switches, wires, connectors, and the airbag for damage. If the steering wheel is damaged, replacement is typically required. Note: Steering column or shaft replacement may be mandatory following an airbag deployment. Check OEM documentation for required parts when an airbag has deployed. -Steering Column Inspection – inspect steering columns for damage to the column, mounting locations, shrouds, attached levers, and controls. Steering columns are designed to collapse during an accident that drives the steering gear rearward or upward. -Left arrow is impact force. Right arrow is collapse -Steering Column Considerations – measuring steering column length usually requires removing the column from the vehicle. Some vehicles have a pyrotechnic charge that causes them to collapse under certain conditions. Deployed pyrotechnic columns will set a diagnostic trouble code (DTC). Column brackets may include breakaway mounts that allow the column to move forward when impacted on the steering wheel. Inspect that the tilt mechanism functions properly. They should not be jammed or loose. Individual service parts may be available. Note that some columns are only to be serviced as an assembly. -Shaft and Coupling Inspection – steering shafts and couplings are designed to connect the steering wheel to the steering gear. Steering shaft designs typically include telescoping sections that may collapse. Some designs incorporate accordion sections that may deform in a collision. Universal joints allow parts to rotate at angles and allow the shaft sections to fold if the steering gear is pushed rearward. Inspect for damaged couplings or U-joints, steering shaft collapse, or bends/runout. If the injected plastic on the steering shaft has sheared, a new steering shaft must be installed. Damaged steering system parts should be replaced. Note: Some fasteners in the steering and suspension may be one-time use and require replacement. Consult OEM service information for specific applications -Power Steering Inspection – inspect power steering systems for leaks, damaged hoses and lines, and damaged pulleys. Check for leaks at any part of the system. To inspect a power steering system for leaks, the power steering pump must be operating. This involves running the engine and turning the steering wheel back and forth. Look for cuts to hoses and lines, and crushed areas on hard lines. Hoses should be inspected to ensure that there is no evidence of the hose swelling. Pulleys may be metal and can be bent, or may be made of plastic and can be broken. Note: Some vehicles may be equipped with variable assist and/or variable ratio systems that may include additional parts in the steering system to inspect. -Hydraulic System – additional parts of the hydraulic system that should be inspected for damage include the power steering pump. Look for physical damage and listen for abnormal noises during pump operation. Inspect the power steering fluid reservoir. Reservoirs may be attached to the pump or may be remotely located. They may be made of metal or plastic. Inspect the reservoir for physical damage or any signs of fluid leakage. Ensure that the fluid level is within the operating range. Also, inspect belts on hydraulic systems that are engine-driven. Inspect belts for fraying, missing pieces, cracks, and proper alignment. Note: If the incorrect fluid is used, leaks or permanent damage may result to hydraulic power steering systems -Electro Hydraulic – electro hydraulic power steering utilizes an electric motor-driven hydraulic pump and control module. Inspect the control module, motor, pump, lines, hoses, wires, connectors, and sensors for damage. Check the dash for a malfunction indicator lamp (MIL). Retrieval of DTC’s typically requires a scan tool. If the pump and or control module are damaged, the replacement will likely require programming. Note: If battery voltage is not sufficient or there is a charging system issue, electro hydraulic and electric steering systems may begin to malfunction -Electric – electric power steering may have the assist motor attached to the steering column or the rack. Inspect all wiring, connectors, control modules, sensors, and the motor for any signs of damage. Follow specific service procedures for repairs. Damaged parts are typically replaced. DTCs can be read with a scan tool. Part replacement may require specific programming operations and calibrations. Note: Electric power steering systems typically operate at high current levels and may be 12 volt, however many operate at higher voltages Damage Analysis of Unitized Structures – Front (1/2) Front Body Inspection Damage Analysis Considerations -Damage Analysis Process – a thorough and accurate damage analysis process for exterior body panels: -Must be established to ensure a complete and safe repair -Will help reduce supplements, which may also affect the timeliness of the repair -Requires a good understanding and knowledge of repair and replacement options for parts of the vehicle exterior -May also require making note of any suspected structural damage. This will indicate that further inspection is required before beginning repairs, to help ensure there are no delays in the repair process -May help develop a repair plan based on the identified damage. The earlier that damage is identified, the more accurate the repair plan -Damage Analysis Precautions – disabling of the supplemental restraints system (SRS) may be required when working on or near parts of the SRS. This is commonly done by removing and isolating the negative battery cable. Refer to vehicle-specific service information to determine how to disable the SRS. It may be necessary to clean up broken glass from the vehicle interior before beginning the inspection process. Protective gloves should be worn when inspecting areas where there are sharp edges. It is also important to prevent further damage to the vehicle. Do not try to force open or close closure panels that are not working properly. Avoid unnecessary force when removing parts during inspection, and store removed parts where they will not be damaged or lost -Repair vs. Replace Considerations – damaged exterior panels will either require repair or replacement -Considerations – considerations regarding repair or replacement of damaged exterior panels include the type of material. Common materials that exterior panels are made of include steel, aluminum, plastic, and composites, such as fiber-reinforced plastics. Identifying the material that a part is made of may determine which repair method is used or if the part will require replacement. Removal of adjacent parts, even though they are not damaged is another consideration -Additional Considerations – additional repair versus replace considerations include the extent and location of damage. Damage located on contour lines and edges may not be able to be returned to the proper state and shape, cracks may develop due to work hardening. Minor damage to mild steel exterior panels is often repairable; however, vehicle maker service information should be referenced to determine repair limitations. Another consideration is how replacement parts are supplied. Some parts are only available as part of an assembly -Panel Straightening Considerations – repairing damaged exterior panels often involves straightening -Vehicle Maker Recommendations – considerations regarding straightening of exterior panels include vehicle maker recommendations. This includes whether straightening is allowed, or whether heat may be applied. -Types of Material – the type of material used for the panel is another consideration. High-strength steel (HSS) and aluminum panels are more prone to cracking than parts made from mild steel. Determining whether or not welding may be used to repair cracked exterior panels may depend on vehicle maker recommendations. Magnesium is typically not used for exterior panels, however it may be used in other body part construction and is limited to cold straightening of minor deformation that does not include cracks or tears. Deformation in some plastics may be reshaped using heat. Gouges, cracks, holes, or tears may be repairable using approved materials and techniques. Always reference vehicle maker recommendations on the type and location of damage to be repaired -Durability of the Repair – even though a part may not be considered structural, durability of the repair may be a concern if damage is repaired in an area subject to repeated stress, such as road vibrations. After time, the repair area may fail -Passenger Protection – additional panel straightening considerations include passenger protection. Some parts are designed to collapse in a specific manner. Straightening or welding a bend or kink in a collapse zone may affect the safety of passengers in a subsequent collision. -Paintless Dent Repair (PDR) – another consideration is paintless dent repair (PDR). PDR is a technique used to fix minor dents on exterior panels without the need to refinish. This repair method is done using tools designed to access the backside of panels from various angles and work the dent outward to the original shape. Additionally, glue-on pulling tabs may be attached to the outer panel to remove some dents. A repair facility may be able to provide this type of repair, or it can be sublet -Business Decision – if the vehicle maker does not provide repair procedures or recommendations, determining whether a part is repaired or replaced is a subjective business decision. The decision to repair or replace a part must be communicated and agreed upon by the repair facility, insurance company, and vehicle owner. The damaged panel must be straightened as close as possible to the original shape. The integrity and durability of the part must be similar to the original part. The use of body filler must not exceed the vehicle recommendations. If none exist, follow product maker recommendations Emblems, Moldings, and Pinstriping -Emblems, Moldings, and Pinstriping – many parts of the vehicle exterior have various types of trim and moldings attached. Trim and moldings attached to the vehicle exterior may include, but are not limited to: -Appliques -Weatherstripping -Belt-line moldings -Pinstriping -Emblems -Bodyside molding -Cladding -Graphics -Attachment Methods – -Common methods for attaching trim, moldings, and emblems include: -Adhesive -Two-sided tape -Transfer adhesive -Mechanical fasteners such as plastic clips. Fasteners are sometimes used in conjunction with other attachments, such as adhesive or tape, for proper alignment. Many plastic fasteners are difficult to remove without damage -Note: The attachment method may be included with the replacement part. Plastic clips may be provided with replacement trim and moldings. Emblems may have pre-applied adhesive attached adhesive attached -Other Considerations – other considerations for replacement or removal and installation (R&amp;I) of trim and moldings include: -Refinishing moldings. Trim and moldings ordered by color may require refinishing -Verifying that all clips and fasteners that do not come with the part are included on the damage report -Removing adjacent parts for access -Pinstriping and Graphics – some vehicles have pinstriping or graphics applied to the exterior body panels. These may be applied. These may be applied by the vehicle maker, dealer, or aftermarket -Replacement Considerations – pinstriping and graphics require replacement if damaged or if the panel is repaired or replaced. Pinstriping and graphics may also be painted on or applied as a decal. Replacement must match adjacent panels. The pinstripe on the entire side of the vehicle may require replacement is this is not possible. For example, if the replacement pinstripe for one panel does not match the original application, it may be necessary to replace the entire pinstripe along that side of the vehicle -Additional Considerations – decals may only be available as a kit for one or both sides of the vehicle. Another aftermarket option for vehicles is vehicle wraps. Vehicle wraps are common on fleet vehicles. It will most likely be a sublet operation, but it is necessary to have it removed and replaced. A customer consultation may help identify where to purchase replacement decals, or the business that did the custom graphic work Front Bumper -Bumper Assembly Parts Overview – the primary parts of the front bumper assembly include the: -Bumper cover -Energy absorber -Bumper reinforcement -Air deflectors that direct air through the grille opening -Closeout panels that divert airflow, reducing drag -Attachment brackets and fasteners that secure the bumper assembly to the vehicle structure -Bumper Cover Inspection – scratches, tears, or cracks are just some of the things to look for when inspecting bumper covers -Initial Inspection – when inspecting bumper coves, look for damage to other parts that may be hidden behind the bumper cover. Damaged bumper covers may return to the original shape immediately following the impact. For this reason, it is important to consider parts located behind the bumper cover that may be damaged, such as the energy absorber and bumper reinforcement. Never assume that a hidden part is damaged or undamaged. Visual damage to the bumper cover may indicate more severe damage behind the cover. Disassembly may be required to identify all damage -Additional Inspection – additional front bumper cover inspection points include: Deformation. This may be difficult to see and typically requires looking at all areas of the bumper cover from various angles to properly identify signs of deformation. Damaged mounting tabs or fasteners. This may be apparent if the bumper cover shows signs of misaligned gaps or obvious detachment -Bumper Cover Replace vs Repair Considerations – replace versus repair decisions for damaged bumper covers may be determined by the extent and location of the damage -Bumper Cover Replacement Considerations – bumper covers are often supplied according to various options and equipment. These may include, but are not limited to: -The trim package or model of the vehicle. Different packages may have additional molding or are a different style -Fog lamps -Parking sensors for a parking-assist system. Parking-assist sensors are often reused if undamaged -Headlamp washers -Lower spoilers -Additional Replacement Considerations – other factors that may have to be considered when ordering bumper covers include: -A radar sensor -The engine size -The color -The vehicle year -Tow hooks -Note: The vehicle identification number (VIN) may not identify all options on the vehicle. This is why it is important to be able to identify the various options the vehicle is equipped with. Repair options may be limited in locations where a sensor is present. For example, application of plastic repair adhesives on a front bumper cover may adversely affect the function of a sensor located behind the damaged area -Bumper Cover Repair Considerations – considerations for bumper cover repair: -Include reshaping deformed areas with heat -Include options for repairing cracks or tears with adhesive or plastic welding repair methods -Include options for repairing mounting tabs. Mounting tabs on a plastic cover may be more difficult to repair than a small tear in the center of the cover. For this reason, the number of damaged mounting tabs may reduce the feasibility of repair -Additional Repair Considerations – additional repair considerations for bumper cover repair may: -Depend on the location of damage. For example, damage located on contour lines, or formed areas, may not be repairable. The extent of damage to the bumper cover may make repair a less feasible option -Depend on previous repairs. For example, the finish buildup from previous repairs may require removal, which would make repair a less feasible option -Bumper Reinforcement – the energy absorber and bumper reinforcement are parts of the front bumper assembly -Bumper Energy Absorbers – bumper energy absorbers: -Are designed to absorb minor collision energy, thus reducing physical damage to the vehicle structure. Most energy absorbers absorb collision energy by crushing or collapsing. -May be made of a high-density foam -May be in the form of molded plastic, usually a square cell structure. When inspecting energy absorbers in the form of molded plastic, inspect the cell structure for crushing or other deformation -Are typically designed for one-time use and must be replaced if damaged -Bumper Reinforcement – the bumper reinforcement: -May be called the impact bar -Distributes collision energy and may affect timing of the SRS -Is typically made from very strong materials such as UHSS or aluminum -Is located behind the energy absorber and attaches to both front lower rail ends or crush boxes -Crush Boxes – crush boxes: -May be separate parts that are attached with bolts, or are designed into the bumper reinforcement and replaced as an assemble -Are designed to absorb crash energy. The crush boxes are one of the first parts of the vehicle to collapse during a front impact collision -May prevent structural damage to the front lower rails if the collision was not too severe -May also be called crush caps or crash boxes -Bumper Reinforcement Inspection – when inspecting bumper reinforcements: -Look for cracks or deformation -Inspect the attachment points. Inspect the mounting points for tears or deformation -Inspect any crush boxes that are designed into the part. Some bumper reinforcements are supplied with built-in crush boxes -Grille Assembly – the front grille assembly may attach to the front bumper assembly or hood -Grille Assembly – besides the grille itself, parts of the grille assembly may include, but are not limited to: -A cover -Moldings -An emblem -Brackets and fasteners -Electric vehicle charging ports -Note: Parts of electronic systems, such as adaptive cruise control sensors or cameras, may be located on or behind the grille. These types of electronic devices may have the appearance of a small camera lens or electronic sensors with attached wires. A flashlight may be beneficial when looking for devices located behind the grille -Grille Repair and Replace – parts of the grille may be available separately, or be part of an assembly. Plastic repair techniques are limited on these parts because it is difficult to make an invisible repair, such as matching the texture of the part. The feasibility of repair is also a determining factor. Mounting tap repair may be an option, depending on the type of plastic and extent of damage Front Lighting -Front Lighting – projector-type headlamps, which create a focused beam of light, typically used for the low-beam headlamps, is just one example of front exterior lighting -Types of Headlamps – various types of headlamps include -Composite headlamps that use a replaceable halogen bulb -High-intensity discharge (HID), or xenon, headlamps. HID headlamps use an electronic control unit (ECU) or HID ballast unit that changes DC voltage to AC voltage -Light-emitting diode (LED) headlamps. LED bulbs cannot be replaced separately. Damaged LED headlamps will require replacement as a complete assembly -Sealed beam headlamps, which have separate bulbs for low and high beams, or one bulb with two filaments, for the low and high beams. This type of headlamp assembly must be completely sealed in order to light and not commonly used on modern vehicles -Personal Safety – high amounts of voltage are used to light HID headlamps, so serious injury may occur from incidental contact. Do not touch the ballast or any nearby parts unless the power has been disabled on the vehicle. Disabling the power is typically done by disconnecting and isolating the negative battery cable and waiting a specific time for the power to discharge. Refer to vehicle-specific service information for proper procedures when working around HID headlamps -Adaptive Front Lighting Systems – adaptive front lighting systems: -May include self-leveling headlamps that adjust vertically to prevent glare into oncoming traffic -May include swiveling headlamps, which swivel horizontally when the steering wheel is turned -Use electric motors to adjust the angle of the lights -May have an electronic control unit that may be located near, or is part of, the headlamp assembly -May light a malfunction indicator lamp (MIL) if there is a problem with the system -Front Lamp Assembly Inspection – the headlamp assembly may require removal for a thorough inspection -Front Lamp Assembly Inspection – when inspecting front lamp assemblies, verify proper operation. Check for looseness, which may indicate damage. Check both headlamps. Collision energy may have transferred to the non-impact side of the vehicle and damaged the other headlamp. This may be a concern in cold temperatures, as parts become more brittle when cold. Service parts may be available for some broken mounting tabs, note the appearance may be different from original -Additional Inspection Considerations – some disassembly may be required to access mounting areas, such as bumper cover removal. Mounting points may be damaged even if there are no visual indications of damage on the exterior. Also check adjacent parts, such as brackets or the headlamp mounting panel, for damage. Damage to the backside of the lamp assembly may affect reflective material and be a safety concern for oncoming drivers, and be sure to check the wiring and connectors for damage -Headlamp Assembly Considerations – considerations for damaged front lamp assemblies may include removing minor scratches on the lens. Abrasive methods, such as buffing, may degrade the ultraviolet (UV) coating on the lens; therefore a chemical product may be used as an alternative. Matching to the opposite side. Due to lens clarity degradation from UV rays, a repaired or replaced headlamp may not match the other headlamp. Restoration products may be a consideration for the original headlamp to match the repaired or new one. How the replacement parts are serviced. A cracked lens may only be available as a lens and housing assembly or as an entire front lamp assembly. Note: Parts of lamp assemblies may include the lamp housing, bulbs, sockets, and wiring harness and connectors -Additional Assembly Considerations – additional assembly considerations include, replacing the lamp assembly if the housing is cracked. Cracks in the lamp assembly housing may cause the bulb sockets to corrode. Also, determining if wiring repair is an option. Some lamp assembly wiring is integrated with the engine compartment wiring harness and not available as a separate replacement part. Thus, it may be more feasible to repair damaged front lamp wiring if allowed by the vehicle maker -Headlamp Aiming – if there has been damage to the headlamp assembly, or the headlight mounting area, an aiming procedure may be required. Aiming headlamps may: -Be required if lamps are replaced or removed and installed (R&amp;I) -Be done using special aiming equipment -Requires verifying proper operation of the adaptive front lighting systems. A damaged motor may cause an improper or non-functioning adaptive lighting system. A scan tool may be required to verify operation or identify diagnostic trouble codes. -Note: Headlamp aiming should be checked every time the headlamps are removed or replaced. This will verify if the lights need adjustment Fenders -Fender – the fender is the outer panel located above the front wheels and is commonly bolted to the vehicle structure. -Fender Inspection – fenders may be made of steel, aluminum, plastic, or composite materials. When inspecting fenders for damage -Look for visible damage -Check the gaps between adjacent panels for misalignment. Gap issues may indicate structural damage -Check the mounting locations -Note: The top mounting locations for the fender on some vehicles are designed to collapse in the event of a pedestrian impact. Vehicle makers may not allow repairs to the fender mounting brackets. The service part may be available separately or may only be part of an assembly. The vehicle maker may allow them to be removed and used independently. Finally, look for indications of previous repairs -Fender Repair vs Replace – vehicle makers may have specific repair limitations for fenders. Considerations for fender repair include the extent and location of damage as well as the material type. Damage to metal fenders is generally repairable; however, highly formed areas like the back edge may limit the repairs to less involved damage. Complex shapes, body lines, and access may also limit the extent of damage that can be repaired. NVH materials may be on the backside of some fenders. Plastic and composite fenders are typically repaired with appropriate repair materials and methods. Vehicle makers may limit repairs to damage that does not extend to the edge of the part. Repairs to a fender usually require some adjacent part removal and may require R&amp;I of the fender -Fender Replacement – when replacing or R&amp;I of the fender is required, adjacent parts usually require R&amp;I, this may include, but is not limited to, the bumper cover, front lighting, rocker panel molding, cowl area trim, and fender liner. Some vehicle makers seal the back edge of the fender to the A-pillar with foam. Fender bolts may be one-time use -Fender Liners and Splash Shields – damaged fender liners and splash shields with minor damage may be required using heat or plastic repair techniques but the repair may be difficult due to thin materials in most situations. Typically, damaged fender liners and splash shields are replaced. Plastic repairs to damaged fender liners are typically not feasible because it is not a refinished part and it is difficult to match some textures. However, tab repair may be an option. Finally inspect for damaged clips and mounting holes -Other Fender Attachments – other parts attached to the fender that may require replacement or removal include: emblems, nameplates, moldings, and electric charging ports. Mechanical attachments and electrical grounds may be found on trucks and SUVs Hood -Hood Crush Zones – hoods typically have crush zones in the underside panels to cause them to fold during a collision, preventing hood intrusion into the passenger compartment. Another repair or replace consideration is whether or not the crush zones can be repaired without affecting the: -Integrity of the part. Crush zones must initiate folding during a frontal impact -Durability of the part. The hood must retain the proper shape for the life of the repair -Hood Repair – there are specific factors to take into consideration when determining a hood repair or replacement -Hood Inspection – hoods should also be inspected for: -Misalignment with the adjacent body panels and cowl. Also inspect for proper alignment of the latch and striker -Proper operation of the main and secondary latch mechanisms -Damage to hinges. When inspecting the hinges, check for the proper alignment of the safety stops. These reduce the likelihood of the hood entering the passenger compartment from a frontal impact -Indications of previous repairs, such as excessive film thickness or the use of body filler. Excessive film thickness of the finish could potentially lead to the removal of the existing finish before refinishing -Hood Repair Considerations – repair considerations for hoods include the extent and location of damage. Damage to panel contours may be difficult to straighten. Access to the backside of the damage may be required to apply corrosion protection. Repairs to composite hoods may be limited due to no access to the panel backside to make a two-sided repair. Another consideration is the type of substrate, such as mild or high-strength steel, aluminum, or composite. High-strength steel and aluminum may be more difficult to straighten compared to mild steel -Aluminum Hood Repair Considerations – vehicle makers may have specific repair limitations for aluminum hoods. Considerations for repair include the extent, location, and type of damage. PDR techniques including glue pull tabs may be an option for dent removal. Aluminum has less memory than mild steel and is not easily returned to the proper shape following collision damage. Aluminum work hardening characteristics can cause cracks to form during repairs to highly formed areas. Welding of cracks or tears may be challenging due to limitations in access to properly clean the backside of the panel. Some vehicle makers may have recommendations against welding cracks on aluminum hoods. -Hood Replacement Considerations – considerations for hood replacement include: -Replacing all damaged parts. The hood is typically supplied separately from the attached parts. Parts of the hood that may be damaged and may require replacement include the hood hinges, latch mechanisms, support rod, hood cushions, molding, and trim -Reinstalling the hood insulator, if it is undamaged. Replace all fasteners that were damaged during the collision or removal -Ensuring all labels that were attached to the hood are replaced -Additional Hood Replacement Considerations – additional hood replacement considerations include the application of chip-resistant coatings on the leading edge of the hood. Also, seam sealer may be required. Some replacement hoods do not have seam sealer applied by the factory. Another consideration is making adjustments to ensure the hood is properly aligned Aftermarket Parts -Accessories – front body accessories may be OEM or aftermarket, and may include: the grille guard, colored display lighting, tow hooks, and a snow plow -Damaged Accessory Considerations – some damaged accessory considerations include: -Checking for branding on the part, be it OEM or another brand -Customer consultation as to where to obtain parts -The owners insurance policy, or company guidelines, and repair options Damage Analysis of Unitized Structures – Front (2/2) Front Unitized Structure Damage Analysis Front Impact -Front Structure Commonly Damaged Parts – front impacts may damage one or more of the following parts of the unitized structure: -Radiator core support -Front rails – upper and lower -Strut towers -Aprons -Cowl -Engine cradle -Radiator Core Support Repair vs. Replace – the material type should be considered when making repair versus replace decisions. For example, minor straightening of a steel part may be allowed; however, a cracked magnesium or composite radiator core support is generally replaced. Considerations include replacing only the damaged portion of the radiator core support, if provided by the vehicle maker. Replacement of one side may eliminate having to remove the fender and other adjacent parts on the opposite side. This may be done along factory seams. Generally speaking, this option is model specific. It is also important to remember to re-order labels for the upper tie bar if it is replaced. -Upper Rail Repair Considerations – when making repair and replace decisions on the upper rail: -Sectioning options may be available depending on the vehicle maker. While not the most common type of repair, there are some procedures available. -It may be allowed to just replace the outer or inner portion of the rail -Replacement procedures generally require separation from the strut tower -Straightening may be possible, depending on the steel strength, but note heat considerations or if heat may be used at all -Lower Rails – lower rails: -May use mild, HSS, or UHSS -Have sectioning procedures. Many models have multiple optional locations; however, some do not recommend any sectioning locations, requiring complete rail assembly to be replaced -May allow replacing either the inner or outer portion of the rail -Note: It is recommended to only follow the part replacement guidelines outlined by the vehicle maker. If a vehicle maker does not offer sectioning guidelines, then sectioning should not be done -Strut Towers – strut towers are generally replaced when damaged -Strut Tower Overview – strut tower position is critical for proper suspension alignment and affects angles such as steering axis inclination (SAI), caster, or camber. Underhood measurement quick checks can be made to determine if the strut tower has moved. This requires measuring the distance between the strut towers, as well as measuring to other areas under the hood. Point-to-point specifications can be found in vehicle service information or estimating guides. Note: Strut towers are commonly made from stamped steel. However, some vehicle models are made from cast aluminum -Replacement Considerations – Considerations for replacing the strut tower assembly may include: -Partial replacement as an option depending on vehicle maker recommendations, the design of the part, and the extent of damage -Complete part replacement of the strut tower rail assembly -Extensive vehicle disassembly which may include but is not limited to parts such as powertrain, suspension, adjacent body parts, etc. -Rivets and bonding adhesive which is commonly used for aluminum strut towers -Apron or Skirt – the fender apron, also called a skirt -Fills in the area between the strut tower and radiator core support -Connects the upper and lower rails -Adds rigidity to the front structure -Note: Aprons are typically light-gauge construction. Minor repairs may be possible. Some apron panels are highly formed and difficult to restore the original shape -Cowl (Dash Panel) – the cowl panel is not often repaired. Damage that deep into the vehicle structure may have too many other issues, and oftentimes the vehicle is a total loss. Repairs to the cowl may require removal of vehicle parts in the area of the damage. This may include: -Engine and transmission assembly -Windshield -Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning parts -Instrument panel -Carpet -Interior trim -Note: Upper cowl panel replacement may require VIN transfer -Engine Cradle – the engine cradle: -May also be called a sub frame -Is used to hold the engine and transmission in place -Attaches to the front lower rails -Is made from aluminum, steel, or magnesium -Is very difficult to straighten, so replacement is common. Some vehicle makers prohibit straightening the engine cradle -Dimension specifications are difficult to find -May contain engine, transmission, steering, and suspension mounting locations -Must be properly aligned to the vehicle structure -Front Structure Damage Analysis – a thorough damage analysis requires examining all areas of the vehicle to ensure a complete and accurate estimate -Front Structure Inspection – when analyzing the front structure for damage: -Start at the area of impact and work toward the rear of the vehicle -Visualize the direction of impact -Check the operation of the doors, hood, and trunk. Do not operate the closure panel if opening it will cause additional damage -The fender-to-door gap is the most common indicator Damage Analysis of Unitized Structures – Center (1/2) Exterior Parts Door Construction and Inspection -Overview – a thorough and accurate damage analysis process for exterior body panels: -Must be established to ensure a complete and safe repair -Will help reduce supplements, which may also affect the timeliness of the repair -Requires a good understanding and knowledge of repair and replacement options for parts of the vehicle exterior -May require making note of any suspected structural damage. This will indicate that further inspection is required before beginning repairs to help ensure there are no delays in the repair process -May help develop a repair plan based on the identified damage. The earlier that damage is identified, the more accurate the repair plan -Door Construction – a vehicle door contains several parts, including the: -Door shell, also referred to as the door frame -Outer panel, also referred to as the door skin -Intrusion beam -Note: Replacement door shells often include the door intrusion beam and may include the outer door panel. Depending on the replacement door shell design, an outer door panel may be serviced either as a separate part or only with the complete door assembly. Door intrusion beams are commonly made of ultra-high-strength steel (UHSS) and are designed to reduce the chance of the door collapsing into the passenger compartment during a side impact. The doors may be constructed with a frame around the glass, or they may be frameless -Door Inspection – when inspecting doors for damage, you will need to take certain steps that include: -Checking for visible damage to the outer door panel and door shell -Checking for proper alignment by checking the edges of the door for uneven gaps to adjacent panels -Checking for proper operation by opening and closing the doors -Checking that the window regulator, lock, and power accessories are operating properly -Checking for damaged weatherstripping. Weatherstripping may be attached with adhesive and not removable without causing damage -Damaged Door Intrusion Beams – there may be one or more intrusion beams attached to the door shell. Damaged door intrusion beams should not be straightened and must be replaced. Door intrusion beams may be attached to brackets. Any damaged parts attached to the door intrusion beam should also not be straightened. Straightening damaged UHSS intrusion beams can cause the metal to be brittle, so it may not react as designed in a subsequent collision. Door intrusion beams are typically supplied with a replacement door shell. However, vehicle makers may provide a bolt-on replacement door intrusion beam for some vehicles -Handles, Locks, and Lock Cylinders – inspect door handles, locks, and lock cylinders for proper operation. It is also necessary to inspect them for loose or improper mounting and damage to the keypad -Lock Cylinders -lock cylinders or attaching lock parts cannot be repaired. Replacement lock cylinders must be re-keyed to match the other lock cylinders on the vehicle -Door Handles – during inspection, look for damage to rods, linkages, cables, clips, and hardware associated with the handle and lock cylinder. Due to durability concerns, broken door handles are typically replaced, not repaired. Door handle and lock trim may be ordered according to the color or trim package, but may also require refinishing to achieve the proper color match -Electronic Keypads – some doors have an electronic keypad that can be used to unlock the door. You may need to consult with the customer to get the keypad code to determine if the keypad is working properly -Door Mirror Inspection – due to the variety of options or equipment available, door mirrors may be simple or complex. Mirrors may include mechanical parts or electronic systems that require identification and inspection. -Visual Inspection – inspect exterior mirrors for visual damage such as cracks in the housing or broken glass, as well as loose or improper mounting. Also, check for secondary damage to the door shell or adjacent parts. Verify proper operation of the adjustment control. This may be a pivot-action control or an electronic system using motors to adjust the mirror. Check for proper operation of any heating elements -ADAS Features – during the inspection, determine if the vehicle is equipped with any advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS). If the vehicle has a blind spot detection system, indicator lamps may display in the mirrors. Some vehicles have cameras built into the mirrors requiring inspection as well. Be aware that after repair, there may be additional procedures required to calibrate and/or verify proper operation -Mirror Lighting – for door mirrors, be sure to include inspection of different built-in lighting. Turn signals may be visible in the exterior door mirrors. They may be displayed with a series of LEDs. Verify proper operation of courtesy lighting, which is usually located under the door mirrors -Door Mirror Replacement Considerations – door mirror replacement may include removal and installation (R&amp;I) of the interior door trim panel for access. Mirror assemblies may vary within the same vehicle year, make, and model. It is important to identify the trim package and vehicle options to ensure the mirror is replaced properly. Considerations may include: -Identifying the part or trim color -Determining the type of adjustment controls -Determining if the mirror is heated -Determining whether the mirror contains and advanced systems, such as a blind spot detection indicator or cameras -Note: a power folding mirror may be included as part of a towing package. This may also have to be identified when replacing a door mirror assembly -Door Hinges and Latch Mechanisms – door hinges may be either welded or bolted to the door shell and A- and B- pillars. When inspecting door hinges and latch mechanisms: -Check for visible damage such as distortion or a cracked weld bead -Check for proper operation by verifying that the door swings smoothly on the hinges -Pay attention to any odd movement when the latch engages or disengages from the striker -Ensure the latch mechanism engages and disengages properly -Verify that the door does not drop or pop up; if so, damage to the following is possible -Hinges -Door frame -Vehicle structure -Note: Replacing welded-on hinges with bolt-on replacement parts may be recommended. This may require drilling holes for the bolts Door Part Repair and Replacement -Outer Door Panel Repair – repair options may depend on the type of material. Outer door panels may be made of steel, aluminum, or sheet-molded compound (SMC). Damage to the outer door panel may require straightening or replacement, depending on the extent and location of damage. Minor dents may be repaired with paint less dent repair (PDR), however, this may require removing the glass to prevent breaking it. -Outer Door Panel Replacement – considerations for outer door panel replacement include: Part availability and attachment methods and application of materials -Part Availability and Attachment Methods – replacing the outer door panel alone is not an option if it is only supplied with the door shell. Attachment methods must also be considered, including: -GMA welding -Squeeze-type resistance spot welding (STRSW) -Adhesive -Rivets -Any combination of welds, adhesive, and rivets -Note: Outer door panel replacement may require combining welding and adhesive bonding. This should not be confused with the process of weld bonding, which uses adhesive and spot welds in the same joint. Adhesives may be used along the outside flanges, while welds are used in the pinch weld of the window opening or a sectioning joint. Outer door panel replacement may include sectioning on or near the door belt line or window frame -Application of Materials – application of materials is also a consideration for outer door panel replacement. This includes applying: -Anti-corrosion compound to the lower hem flange seam area -Noise, vibration, and harshness (NVH) materials. -Note: This also includes replacing any seam sealer or foam pads removed during the repair process -Door Assembly Replacement – there are a few things to consider when replacing a door assembly. Considerations for replacing a door assembly include transferring the original inner mechanical and electronic parts, as well as interior panels, to the replacement part. On some vehicles, with the exception of the door panel, these parts may be contained in a door cassette and transferred as one piece. If replacing a door with an entire recycled door assembly, all of the inner electrical and mechanical parts, as well as the interior trim panel may have to be transferred from the original door assembly. If the interior trim color and accessories do not match, removing parts from both the original door assembly and from the recycled door assembly may be required. The original parts would then be installed in the recycled door assembly. -Van Doors – van sliding doors may be equipped with a variety of options and features. Sliding doors are similar to other doors; however, the attachment is different, using tracks and rollers instead of hinges. The glass may be fixed or moveable. Most sliding doors have power opening and closing features with remote operation. Some have the hands-free option. Similar to other doors, look for any damage to the skin or frame and verify gaps and fit-up to adjacent panels. Check the opening and closing operation using all available options. Inspect the rollers, tracks, latches, and strikers for proper operation. Hands-free operated doors typically have a sensor mounted in the rocker panel. -Repair – repair considerations for a sliding door are similar to those of a hinged door. NVH materials or other materials may be present which should be identified if using weld-on dent removal techniques. Generally, outer panels are only serviced with the entire door shell assembly -Replacement – sliding door replacement requires transferring all undamaged parts from the original door to the replacement. Sometimes door alignment can be challenging. It may require an assistant or a door support dolly. NVH, seam sealer, and corrosion protection application are additional considerations. The power operation feature will typically require an initialization procedure for the door to function properly. Verify all aspects and features of the sliding door function -Other Door Considerations – other considerations regarding repair or replacement of the door include: Inspecting the side impact sensor for damage and replacing labels attached to replacement parts -Side Impact Sensors – replacement of any side impact sensor located near collision damage may be recommended. On some vehicles, the side impact sensors are located in the doors. Some vehicles may have the airbag mounted in the seat side, while some have them mounted in the door. A deployed side airbag will have to be replaced. This may require replacing the interior door trim panel as well. Some vehicle makers specify replacement of any supplemental restraint system (SRS) sensor located near collision damage, regardless of deployment. The SRS may have to be disabled before inspection. Disabling is commonly done by disconnecting the vehicle battery and waiting a few minutes. Check the vehicle service information for the specific SRS disabling procedure -Replacing Labels – when replacing a door, labels attached to original parts may have to be replaced. There may also be labels attached to replacement parts that should not be removed Movable Glass Inspection and Repair -Movable Glass – movable glass may include door glass, quarter glass, and sunroofs. Movable glass may also include rear glass on some SUVs and pickups. It may also be present as a sliding panoramic roof assembly. Movable glass may be laminated, but it is typically tempered. Tempered glass will shatter upon impact, limiting repair options to minor surface scratches. Minor cracks in laminated door glass may be repairable if the damage is contained to the outer layer of the glass -Glass Inspection – inspect movable glass for: -Cracks -Deep pits -Chipped edges -Scratches -Water leaks -Signs of improper, previous installation -Note: Damage that can be felt with your fingernail is typically not repairable. There may also be damage to the interior side caused by mass inertia. Disassembly may be required to completely inspect movable glass. This is especially true if the door glass was lowered or open during the collision. If the glass is broken, cover the area to prevent moisture from damaging the vehicle interior -Movable Glass Considerations – considerations for damaged movable glass include determining the correct window tint. Placing a white sheet of paper behind the glass on the undamaged side may identify the level or color of the tint. Coding information located on the bottom of the glass may also include the type of tint. Aftermarket tint may be identified by a seam line near the top portion of the glass. Pieces of glass may also fall into areas that can restrict the movement of mechanical parts. Examples: -Glass run channels -Seat tracks -Seat belt retractors -Note: Glass between the door intrusion beam and the outer door panel also needs to be removed -Movable Glass Parts Inspection – inspect movable glass parts for proper operation through the whole range of movement. A damaged module will result in inoperative power windows and may have blown fuses, damaged wires, or damaged motors. Loose or corroded grounds, connectors, or terminal pins may also be the cause of an inoperative power window. Inspect for loose or missing parts, binding, or improper alignment. To prevent further damage, do not try to force the glass if it is binding. Shake the door and listen for clanking sounds, which may indicate loose interior parts or damage -Heated Glass – heated glass is common with back glass, but may also be found on movable glass, such as movable lift gate glass. Heated glass typically has wires or grid lines printed onto the glass. The heating parts may be repairable. Repairs include reattaching loose terminals with conductive epoxy or solder. Minor damage to grid lines may be repaired with conductive paint. Grid lines with major damage or those that are falling off will require replacement Sunroof Inspection and Repair Considerations -Sunroofs – roof panels may be equipped with a sunroof, which is typically removed and reinstalled into the new roof panel following replacement. Sunroofs may be designed to fully open by sliding the glass backward, or may be hinged at the front to only partially open. Roof panels may also be equipped with a movable panoramic glass roof. Panoramic roofs are wider than sunroofs and extend closer to the sides of the vehicle for a wider view and to allow in more light -Sunroof Inspection – sunroofs should be inspected for proper operation through the whole range of movement. Again, be cautious of binding glass, and do not force movement. Additional damage may include: -Misaligned or damaged guide rails -Damaged weatherstripping -Damaged or missing clips -Damaged switches, cables, or gears -A damaged air deflector -Pinched drain tubes -Note: Plan to replace the glass if it is damaged. Determine if the mounting parts will be replaced or reused -Sunroof Assembly Inspection Considerations – there are other inspection considerations for replacing sunroof or movable panoramic roof assemblies. Determine which parts require replacement and which parts can be ordered separately. For example, only the glass may require replacement if it is damaged. If damage extends to parts of the frame, the frame assembly has to be replaced. Determine whether the parts are bolted or bonded. The glass may be bolted to the frame. The frame may be bolted and bonded to the roof -Sunroof Assembly Removal Considerations – some considerations for removing a sunroof or movable panoramic roof assembly may include removing the appropriate adjacent parts. For example, the headliner may require removal or repositioning. It may be recommended to remove an adjacent panoramic roof when the sunroof assembly requires replacement. Vehicle maker procedures must be followed to ensure the sunroof is installed properly and to prevent damage to adjacent parts. Perform an initializing procedure, if required, either manually or with a scan tool Damage Analysis of Unitized Structures – Center (2/2) Structural Damage Analysis Side Body Structure and Pillar Repair Considerations -Side Body Structure – pillars and rocker panels are part of the passenger compartment structure. To protect vehicle occupants, the passenger compartment must remain intact. A-, B-, C-, and D-pillars, along with rocker panels and roof rails, may be part of a one-, or two-piece uniside for the outer panel depending on how the quarter panel is attached. Most have multiple reinforcements made from HSS and UHSS. This may include inner and outer reinforcements. Pillars and rocker panels also use inner panels to close out the backside of the part -Servicing Outer Uniside Assemblies – vehicle build sequence may influence how the uniside is replaced. If adjacent parts such as the roof overlap the uniside, you may have to remove an undamaged roof in the process of replacing the upper uniside. Undamaged roof panels should not be reused once they are removed. Unisides may be serviced as an assembly or smaller parts. Vehicle makers may have replacement requirements that include specific sectioning locations. They may identify sectioning areas with no specific measurements. In some situations, vehicle makers may recommend sectioning locations be determined based on the service part and the amount of damage -A-Pillar Considerations – when inspecting an A-pillar, look for visual damage and verify gaps to adjacent parts. It is important to determine if damage is limited to the outer panel or if it radiates deeper into an underlying reinforcement. Vehicle makers may have profile or cutaway views of pillars showing the layers of construction in the body repair manual. A-pillar outer panels may be made from a variety of materials which may affect repairability -Possible Limitations – when deciding whether or not to repair an outer A-pillar, note that most A-pillars contain foam or other materials that may present a fire hazard if using weld-on dent removal equipment. Also, there may be curtain airbags behind the A-pillar trim. You must deactivate the airbag system and remove the airbag module when working in this area -Sectioning – consult the repair information to determine if sectioning is permitted. When repairing the A-pillar, sectioning joints are often made in the windshield area and near the rocker panel. Sectioning in these areas requires removing the windshield. If not recommendations exist from the vehicle maker, the part should be replaced at factory seams -Replacement – if full part replacement is required, be aware that: -The A-pillar may be serviced as part of the uniside -Extensive adjacent part separation or removal may be required. This may include the roof, upper fender rail, rocker panel, or other parts -Any foams inside the pillar rea affected require removal and reinstallation -The instrument panel is generally removed if the inner A-pillar must be replaced -Windshield removal is required -Most vehicle makers require complete replacement of the reinforcement if it is damaged -A-Pillars on Convertibles – the A-pillars on convertible vehicles: -May have a tubular-shaped reinforcement -May be two-part construction -May be multi-part construction that includes an inner, outer, and reinforcement -B-Pillars – the B-pillar has: -An inner panel -An outer panel that is generally part of a uniside -At least one reinforcement -Note: The reinforcement material is generally HSS or UHSS -B-Pillar Considerations – there are several considerations you should be aware of regarding the design, inspection, and repair methods of B-pillars -Inspection – it is important to determine if damage is limited to the outer panel, or if it radiates deeper into the reinforcement. Unless there is specific design information that shows how close the reinforcement is to the outer panel, it may be difficult to determine if the reinforcement is damaged -Repair – for repairs, the B-pillar reinforcement sectioning procedures are limited. Most vehicle makers require complete replacement of the reinforcement if it is damaged. If no recommendations exist from the vehicle maker, the part should be replaced at factory seams -C- and D-Pillar Considerations – when determining procedures for repairing the C- and D-pillars, keep in mind: -The back glass typically requires removal for C- and D-pillar installation -Inner assemblies are generally replaced at factory seams -C- and D-pillars may be separated from the quarter panel at the roof-to-pillar seam -C- and D-pillars may be included with the replacement quarter panel -C- and D-Pillar Considerations Continued – additional considerations for C- and D-pillar repair or replacement procedures include removing adjacent parts and any foam -Adjacent Parts – adjacent parts may require removal when replacing parts at factory seams. For example, the roof, rocker panel, or quarter panel may require removal to gain access to a pillar. Interior trim will also likely require removal -Foam – pillars may be filled with foam. Foam that is removed during the repair process should be replaced with the same type and amount of foam -Overlapping Panels – on some vehicles, the roof panel overlaps the outer panel. Removal of the outer C- and D-pillar panels also requires removing enough roof panel flange spot welds to gain access to the outer panel, while being careful to not damage the roof panel. The same may be an issue with the B-pillar. In some instances, just a portion of the roof can be lifted to remove the part. In others, the entire roof panel may have to be removed Rocker Panel Inspection and Repair Considerations -Rocker Panels – the rocker panels are typically three or more layers. Outer rocker panels are generally part of a uniside. Reinforcements are usually UHSS or aluminum and may be in close proximity to the outer panel and subject to damage. The rocker panel may have multiple reinforcements at the base of the pillars -Repair – when considering rocker panel repair, there is typically no access to the backside of an outer rocker panel to push out damage. Therefore, glue pull tabs or weld-on dent removal tools are used. Be aware that some rocker panels are filled with foam or other materials which may limit weld-on dent removal operations. Foam or other materials that are removed during the repair process should be replaced with the same type and amount -Replacement – when replacing an outer rocker panel, the vehicle maker may have sectioning procedures or require the installation of the complete part. Some vehicle makers service portions of the rocker panel while others only service it with an entire uniside. Multiple sectioning locations may be provided for the outer rocker panel. Vehicle makers may permit sectioning according to the damage for the outer rocker panel, based on specific criteria. Typically, outer rocker panel replacement involves sectioning near the base of the pillars. Always follow vehicle maker procedures -Reinforcements – reinforcement sectioning is more limited and should only be done following vehicle maker recommendations. If no sectioning procedures exist, full part replacement is required. This may require extension disassembly and removal of adjacent parts Floor Pan Inspection and Repair Considerations -Floor Pan Inspection – a complete inspection of the floor generally requires the vehicle to be raised on a lift. Look for any damaged coatings, dents, crushed areas, tears, or punctures. Some vehicles will have aerodynamic panels underneath that may be damaged and require removal to inspect the floor. Interior parts, seats, and carpet may also require removal for a thorough inspection. Measuring can be done to verify the proper dimensions. Determine if the damage is isolated to the floor or if there is damage radiating into the floor from other adjacent areas. -Repair – repair considerations to a damaged floor include: -Vehicle maker repair recommendatiosn -Material type and strength -Damage type, extent, and location -Note: Floor pans may be mild steel. However, some vehicle makers are using HSS, UHSS, or other materials such as aluminum or composites. Be aware that damage to the floor may affect the occupant classification system (OCS) on some vehicles. This may require zeroing or calibration of the OCS -Crossmembers – floor crossmembers may be made of HSS or UHSS and are considered structural parts that need to be inspected for damage -Cowl Panel Attachment – some floor pans are attached to cowl panels. Refer to vehicle maker recommendations to identify the joining process used when making floor pan repairs that involve attachment to cowl panels. If damage has radiated into the cowl panel, service parts are available but repairs are not very common. Damage that radiates dep into the vehicle structure may have caused many other issues, and often the vehicle is a total loss -Floor Pan Replacement Considerations – there are several factors to consider when determining whether you should repair or replace a floor pan -Part Availability – replacement floor pans may be available in one-piece or in multiple-panels. Some vehicle makers also provide replacement parts for floor pans, such as NVH material and floor plugs -Replacement Procedures – front pans are typically replaced at the factory seam. Some vehicle makers have sectioning procedures which may identify cut lines, while others may be based on specific criteria. Repair and replacement procedures may not be provided by some vehicle makers. In a situation like this, the insurer, vehicle owner, and repair facility need to discuss all options to determine how the vehicle should be repaired -Accessibility – most vehicles are built starting with the floor pan with the rest of the parts installed around it. As a result, it will be difficult to remove a complete floor pan to install a replacement. The entire uniside, rails, or the roof may need to be replaced in order to install a replacement floor pan Roof Panel Inspection and Repair Considerations -Roof Panel Inspection – roof panels may be constructed from steel, aluminum, composites, glass, or a combination of any of these. Inspect for damage including dents, tears, punctures, scratches, chips, cracks, and cracked seam sealer. There may be damage to antennas or other roof-mounted accessories such as luggage racks or bicycle carriers. Vinyl roofs are not common; however, if equipped, check for damage or tears. Convertible tops may be fabric, vinyl, or retractable hardtops and should be inspected for damage as well. Inspect the underlying structure including the roof bows, side rails, as well as the front and rear glass attachment areas. Check the operation of power roofs -Roof Panel Repair – when considering roof panel repair, there may be limited accessibility to the backside of the panel to push out damage. Therefore, glue pull tabs or weld-on dent removal tools may be used if permitted by the vehicle maker. Repair to roof bows and side rails may be limited due to construction materials. Some may be UHSS or aluminum. Be aware that foam or other NVH materials may be present. Damage repair may require headliner and other part removal. Vehicle makers may have limitations on repairing certain materials such as carbon fiber. This may limit the repair to minor cosmetic scratch removal -Roof Replacement – vehicle build sequence may influence how the roof panel and supporting structure are replaced. If adjacent parts, such as the uniside, overlap any panels requiring replacement, you may have to section or replace the uniside. Follow vehicle maker attachment procedures when replacing a roof. Stationary glass, side curtain airbag, and additional interior trim removal are typically required. Attachment methods may include: rivet bonding, STRSW, MAG welds, and adhesives. Consider foams, NVH materials, and corrosion protection materials. For any roof repair or replacement procedures, identify ADAS service and calibration requirements that may be applicable. Damage Analysis of Unitized Structures – Rear (1/2) (1 of 2) Rear Body and Aftermarket Parts Inspection Rear Bumpers and Lighting -Overview – a thorough and accurate damage analysis process for exterior body panels: -Must be established to ensure a complete and safe repair -Will help reduce supplements, which may also affect the timeliness of the repair -Requires a good understanding and knowledge of repair and replacement options for parts of the vehicle exterior -May also require making note of any suspected structural damage. This will indicate that further inspection is required before beginning repairs to help ensure there are no delays in the repair process -May help develop a repair plan based on the identified damage. The earlier that damage is identified, the more accurate the repair plan -Rear Body Inspection – when analyzing the rear structure for damage: -Start at the area of impact and work toward the front of the vehicle -Visualize the direction of impact -Use the same procedures as a front end analysis when examining bumpers, lighting, and closure panels -Rear Bumper Considerations – repair considerations for a damaged rear bumper cover include checking vehicle maker recommendations, location, type, and severity of damage. Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) as well as other technologies may affect repairs -ADAS – the rear bumper may have sensors or other electronic parts that require inspection. This may include, but is not limited to, blind spot detection, cross-traffic alert, parking assist sensors, and rear collision detection. These sensors may be mounted behind, through or on the sides of the bumper cover. Damage to sensors may set diagnostic trouble codes (DTC), turn on a system malfunction indicator lamp (MIL), or display a driver information system message. Damaged sensors require replacement. Most sensors may be replaced independently. Replacement parking sensors may require refinishing to match the vehicle. Some vehicle makers do not recommend refinishing sensors because the excessive paint thickness may adversely affect the parking assist system. Refer to the vehicle-specific service information for service requirements. New bumper covers may require drilling or punching of parking assist sensor holes -Bumper Absorbers and Reinforcement – most vehicles have an energy absorber and reinforcement beneath the bumper cover. Molded plastic or foam energy absorbers are typically designed for one-time use and must be replaced if damaged. Mechanical energy absorbers are not as common and are typically replaced if damaged. Inspect for leaks, bends, correct length, and proper operation. Rear bumper reinforcements may be a separate bolt-on part or part of the rear unitized body structure. Construction materials may include steel, aluminum, or composites. Any cracking or tearing of the reinforcement, as well as any damage that may affect the crash characteristics of the vehicle, will require replacement of the part. Steel reinforcements are often made from ultra-high-strength steel (UHSS); therefore, they are generally not straightened -Rear Lamp Assembly Inspection Introduction – there are various parts of lighting to inspect -Bulbs, Sockets, and Housings – check for broken or burned-out bulbs and damaged or corroded bulb sockets. Also, look for cracked or broken lenses or housings. This type of damage allows water and moisture inside and could lead to corrosion or part failure. Inspect mounting locations and hardware for damage. Some lamp assemblies may have additional sensors or ADAS components that should be inspected as well -LEDs – some lamp assemblies use multiple LEDs for illuminating rear lamps. Individual LEDs cannot be replaced because they are typically mounted directly to a circuit board -Electrical – check for cut, pinched, or corroded wires. Inspect for damaged, loose, or corroded grounds or connectors. It may be necessary to partially disassemble the lamp assembly to determine the condition of the connectors and other related electrical parts. Electrical wires for lamp assemblies may be repairable following vehicle maker service information. Connectors and repair wires and terminals may be serviced. Lighting problems related to rear collisions may include blown fuses, shorts, opens in the circuits, and may set a DTC, MIL, or driver information system message. Ensure service parts meet OEM specifications to reduce post-repair lighting system problems -Rear Closure Panel – the rear closure panel may be a deck lid, liftgate, door, or hatch. A deck lid may also be called a trunk lid. Construction materials may include steel, aluminum, magnesium, composites, or plastics. Some vehicles are equipped with a rear spare tire carrier which is in close proximity or attached to the rear closure panel. Inspect the spare tire carrier and attachment points for damage -Inspection – when inspecting rear closure panels, look for signs of visual damage to the outer panel and inner frame. Inspect panel gaps and verify proper operation when opening and closing. Ensure any power open/close features are functional, as well as remote and hands-free operation. Inspect hinges, latches, locks, strikers, alignment guides, support struts, glass, and trim for signs of damage. Check operation of any attached accessories such as lighting, rear wipers, and cameras. Damage to a closure panel may cause the gaps to be off. Additionally, damage to the structure, hinges, latches, or adjacent panels may also affect the gaps. -Repair Considerations – repairability of rear closure panels depend on the construction material, extent, and location of damage, as well as access to the backside of the panel. Rear closure panels made of aluminum or high-strength steel present greater repair challenges compared to a mild steel part. Outer panels have the greatest opportunity for repair. Damage the extends to the inner frame is difficult to access and restore to original shape. This typically requires complete part replacement. Some rear closure panels may have a magnesium inner frame which cannot be straightened or welded. Composite or plastic closure panels may permit outer panel repairs; however, if the inner frame is damaged, they are generally not repaired due to the design of the part. Note: Lock cylinders or attaching lock parts cannot be repaired. Replacement lock cylinders must be rekeyed to match the other lock cylinders on the vehicle. -Replacement Considerations – most rear closure panels are serviced as a complete shell assembly. Some vehicle makers may service an outer panel which is attached with adhesives and a hem flange similar to a door skin. When replacing a rear closure panel assembly, it will necessary to transfer undamaged glass, parts, and accessories. It may be necessary to seam seal the new part. Depending on vehicle options, initializations, calibrations, or both may be required Pickup Truck Box Assembly -Box Assembly Parts – common parts of a pickup truck box assembly include the: -Front panel -Inner side panel -Bed floor -Tailgate -Crossmembers -Outer side panel -Pickup Box Assembly Inspection Introduction – there are a number of areas to check when inspecting the pickup box assembly. Note: Remember to consider aftermarket accessories when inspecting the pickup box assembly. Examples include tonneau covers, caps, and toolboxes -Cab and Front Panel – check the alignment between the front panel of the box assembly and the back panel of the cab. Inconsistent gaps on both sides of the vehicle may indicate structural damage -Front Panel – check the front panel for damage. Mass inertia damage may occur from cargo shifting during a collision. Collision forces from a front or side impact may transfer to the front pickup box panel. If the front panel is damaged, inspect the cab back panel for possible damage as well. Repairs to the front panel may be possible. However, the shape of the panel generally limits the extent of repairs that can be done -Inner Panels, Bed Floor, and Tailgate – check the inner panels, bed floor, and tailgate for direct, indirect, and mass inertia damage caused by objects in the box assembly at the time of the collision. Damage to composite bed floors should follow vehicle maker recommendations and may be limited. Composite floors with cracks or punctures are typically replaced -Crossmembers – inspect the bed floor crossmembers for crushing or other damage. If damage is present, identify if there is damage to the vehicle frame and bed floor as well as attaching hardware. Crossmembers may only be available with the bed floor -Box Mounting Hardware – check the box mounting hardware for damage. This could be an indication that the box has moved. Hardware may be one-time use fasteners which require replacement if loosened or removed. Damaged hardware requires replacement -Pickup Box Assembly Considerations – when considering box assembly repairs, keep in mind the type of material influences the repair methods. Steel and aluminum bedside panels can be repaired using common panel straightening tools and techniques. The box sides on some vehicles are made from sheet molded compound (SMC) which requires access for a two-sided repair if there are any cracks or punctures. If an outer box side requires replacement, it may only be serviced with the inner bedside and wheelhouse, or it may be available as a separate panel. Some repairs and most panel replacements on the bedside will require the bed to be loosened and set back or completely removed from the vehicle. When ordering parts, determine the size of the bed, the attachment method specified by the vehicle maker, and how parts are supplied -Bedliner Repair Considerations – a damaged pickup truck may have a bedliner installed. A bedliner may be OEM or aftermarket, and may be either a plastic drop-in type or a spray-on type. Damaged spray-on bedliners will require repair if it was damaged during the collision or removed during the repair. Repair kits for each type of bedliner may be available. Bedliner repairs may be sublet -Other Considerations – other considerations for pickup truck box assemblies may include inspecting the rear bumper, tailgate, and spare tire hoist -Rear Bumper – full-frame rear bumpers are commonly made of steel and may be painted or chrome-plated. They may have plastic trim or other parts as well as ADAS sensors. Inspect the bumper, mounting brackets, hardware, and other associated parts for damage. Damaged parts are typically replaced. If the rear bumper is damaged, conduct a thorough inspection of the bed for possible damage as well -Tailgate – the tailgate may be equipped with a variety of options including cameras and sensors, steps and assist handles, remote opening, load stops, half-gate opening and more. Inspect the tailgate for visible damage as well as proper gaps and it. This includes inspecting the inner and outer tailgate. Open and close the tailgate to verify the hinges, handle locks and latches operate smoothly with no binding. Damage to the outer panel may be repairable using common panel repair tools and techniques. If damage is excessive and extends to the inner panel, replacement is typically repaired. When doing repairs or replacement, note any moldings, decals, or other parts or hardware that are needed -Spare Tire Hoist – some unibody and full-frame vehicles have an underbody spare tire storage location which utilizes a tire hoist or winch. If the vehicle has sustained collision damage, it is possible the tire hoist is damaged. Inspect the hoist for visible damage and proper operation. If the tire is loose, this may indicate damage to the hoist. A damaged hoist requires replacement Damage Analysis of Unitized Structures – Rear (2/2) (1 of 2) Rear Structural Damage Analysis -Trunk Floor – trunk floors are generally single-layer mild steel. The floor may be part of the rear rail structure in that it contributes to the structural integrity of the rail and can affect how the rear rail collapses. For example, trunk floors often close out three-sided rear rail hat channels. The trunk floor may be one- or two-piece construction. You should inspect the trunk for any attaching parts and damage to those parts. The vehicle battery may be located in the trunk -Trunk Floor Repair Considerations – repairability of the trunk floor will depend on the vehicle maker recommendations, extent and location of the damage, type of construction material, and accessibility for repairs. There may be convolutions and compound shapes to absorb collision energy, limiting repairs in some situations. When determining possible replacement procedures for the trunk floor, note that some vehicle makers have sectioning procedures that may allow a less intrusive repair. Some vehicles have a composite spare tire well that is bonded into the vehicle floor. Repairs may be possible using appropriate plastic repair techniques depending on the extent of damage. Adhesive will be required for complete part replacement. -Rear Floors on SUVs and Minivans – SUVs and minivans have a rear floor pan instead of a trunk. The large rear door opening allows easy access to the rear floor pan. This may reduce the number of adjacent parts that require removal when replacing the floor compared to a trunk floor in a typical passenger car. Some SUVs and minivans have storage tubs integrated into the floor as a storage place for the seat when it is folded down. This storage tub may be bonded into the floor by the vehicle maker. If damaged beyond repair, the replacement tub is bonded using the recommended adhesive -Rear Body Panels – the rear body panel is beneath the deck lid or liftgate and attaches the left and right inner quarter panel structures. The panel may be made from multiple steel strengths, depending on vehicle design. For example, some vehicles have rear body panels made of boron-alloyed steel while other models use mild steel. The rear body panel may be made of multiple panels and serviced as an assembly. -Inspection – rear body panels may have complex shapes which accommodate the rear closure panel, lights, bumper cover attachments, and weatherstripping. Inspect for any obvious physical damage to the rear body panel. Inspect gaps between the rear closure panels and adjacent panels. Look for any inconsistencies which may indicate the rear body panel is damaged. Inspect gaps on tail lamp assemblies and the bumper cover which may also indicate problems with the rear body panel. -Repair Considerations – repairability of the rear body panel will depend on the vehicle maker recommendations, extent and location of the damage, as well as construction material and accessibility for repairs. Repairs may be limited due to multi-layer construction. The complex shape of many rear body panels can make it challenging to restore and align all of the different adjacent parts in some situations. UHSS rear body panels are usually replaced if damaged. -Replacement Considerations – rear body panels are usually replaced at factory seams unless the vehicle maker indicates a sectioning procedure. Quarter panels or other adjacent parts may overlap and be affected when replacing the rear body panel. Installation procedures commonly include using spot welds and may also require adhesive. Panel seams should be sealed to prevent moisture and exhaust fumes from entering the vehicle. -Rear Rail – the rear rails and crossmembers form the rear underbody structure on a unibody vehicle. The rear rails also support the floor pan and trunk floor. Rear rails are made from various steel strengths, depending on vehicle design, and may be closed out by a rear body panel, floor pan, and bumper bracket. The rails may be made from tailor-welded blanks and may be available as a complete sub-assembly. In some configurations, the rear rails serve as the attachment point for the trailer hitch. -Repair Considerations – repairability of rear rails will depend on the vehicle maker recommendations, extent and location of the damage, as well as the type of construction material, and accessibility for repairs. The floor and other panels limit access for repair. Internal rail reinforcements may not be accessible to properly straighten if damaged. Unless it is specified in the repair procedure, an access window should not be cut in the trunk floor to assist with straightening, sectioning, or replacing a rear rail. Cutting out a section of a part, then re-welding the removed section back in place, is considered sectioning and should not be done unless the vehicle maker has a procedure -Replacement and Sectioning Considerations – replacement of a complete rear rail assembly is usually a very involved procedure requiring substantial disassembly of the vehicle which includes interior trim, mechanical parts, and adjacent body components in some situations. Some vehicle makers service rear rail extensions which are installed at factory seams. Sectioning should only be performed following vehicle maker procedures. Considerations for sectioning the rear rail include possible removal of the trunk floor, removal of the rear crossmember, and multiple locations for sectioning, depending on the vehicle maker recommendations -Quarter Panel – parts of the quarter panel that should be inspected include the: -Outer panel -Wheelhouse -Inner panel -Fuel door -Filler neck -fuel label -Quarter glass -Note: When conducting your inspection, be sure to inspect the seams for separation and panel gaps. Removal of the rear bumper cover and rear lamps may be required to inspect for hidden damage. Check the air vents for damage and verify the proper operation of advanced vehicle systems, such as blind spot detection systems. Sensors for the blind spot detection system may be attached to the quarter panels -Repair – repairability of quarter panels will depend on the vehicle maker recommendations, extent and location of the damage, as well as construction material and accessibility for repairs. Metal panels can usually be repaired using common panel straightening tools and techniques. Foam or other materials may be located on the backside of the quarter panel and other inner panels. Foam location may limit backside access -Quarter Panel Replacement – determine if the panel can be sectioned or if it should be replaced at factory seams by considering the location and extent of damage, published procedures from the vehicle maker, and panel design. Replacing a quarter panel at factory seams is recommended by several vehicle makers. However, this may require replacing the roof panel depending on flange design -Additional Considerations – a replacement quarter panel may only be serviced as part of a uniside. This will require cutting the quarter panel section from the assembly at the specified cut locations. It may be necessary to remove and install undamaged glass during the replacement. Common sectioning locations can include the quarter glass or sail panel area, which is most common, at the belt line, and at the dog leg. Similar repair and replacement procedures may apply to cab corners on pickup trucks -Weld Bonding – weld bonding quarter panels is recommended by some vehicle makers. Weld bonding is the process of combining adhesives with spot welds or gas metal arc (GMA) welds. Refer to the body repair manual for guidelines on the location of adhesives and welds. If weld bonding using GMA welding, ensure that there are no adhesives in the weld area Damage Analysis of Unitized Structures – Rear (1/2) (2 of 2) Inspection of the Rear Unibody -Overview – a thorough and accurate damage analysis process for exterior body panels: -Must be established to ensure a complete and safe repair -Will help reduce supplements, which may also affect cycle time -Requires a good understanding and knowledge of repair and replacement options for parts -May also require making note of any suspected structural damage. this will indicate a further inspection is required before beginning repairs to help ensure there are no delays in the repair process -May help develop a repair plan based on the identified damage. the earlier that damage is identified, the more accurate the repair plan -Rear body inspection – when analyzing the rear structure for damage: -Start at the area of impact and work toward the front of the vehicle -Visualize the direction of impact -Use the same procedures as a front-end analysis when examining bumpers, lighting, and closure panels -Rear Bumper Considerations – -Considerations for a damaged rear bumper cover include checking: -Service information of the vehicle maker -Damage location -Type of damage -Severity of damage -Advanced driver assistance system (ADAS) as well as other technologies may affect repairs because some ADAS sensors are located in the rear. New bumper covers may require drilling or punching of holes in the bumper cover for parking assist sensor holes -Advanced Driver Assistance Systems – the rear bumper sensors may include, but are not limited to, blind spot detection, cross-traffic alert, parking assist sensors, and rear collision detection. These sensors may be mounted behind or on the sides of the inner bumper cover. Damage to sensors may set a diagnostic trouble code (DTC), turn on a system malfunction indicator lamp (MIL), or display a driver information system. Damaged sensors require replacement and may require calibration depending on the vehicle maker procedures. Most sensors may be replaced independently. Replacement parking sensors may require refinishing to match the vehicle. Some vehicle makers do not recommend refinishing sensors because the excessive paint thickness may adversely affect the parking assist system. Some vehicle makers offer sensors that match the vehicle color. -Bumper Reinforcement Assembly – most vehicles have an impact pad and reinforcement behind the bumper cover. Molded plastic or foam impact pads must be replaced if damaged. Inspect the reinforcement assembly including the crush tubes for bends and correct lengths. Most rear bumper reinforcements are a separate bolt-on part. Construction materials may include steel, aluminum, or composites. Any cracking or tearing of the reinforcement, as well as any damage that may affect the crash characteristics of the vehicle, requires replacement of the part. Steel reinforcements are often made from ultra-high strength (UHSS); therefore, they are not straightened -Rear Lamp Assembly Inspection – along with the lamp housing, there are various parts of the lighting assembly you may need to inspect. A visual inspection may not be enough, because the damage may not be apparent initially. Consider the hardware, fasteners, electrical connections, and sensitive electronic parts potentially damaged in a collision -Lamp Assemblies and Hardware – in earlier model vehicles, check for broken or burned-out bulbs and damaged or corroded bulb sockets. Also, look for cracked or broken lenses and housings. This type of damage allows water and moisture inside and could lead to corrosion or part failure. Late model vehicles may have light emitting diode (LED) lamp assemblies. Inspect mounting locations and hardware for damage. in addition, some lamp assemblies may have additional sensors or ADAS parts that should be inspected -LED Lighting – some lamp assemblies use multiple LEDs for illuminating rear lamps. Individual LEDs cannot be replaced because they are typically mounted directly to a circuit board -Electrical Inspection – check for cut, pinched, or corroded wires. Inspect for damaged, loose, or corroded grounds and connectors. It may be necessary to partially disassemble the lamp assembly to determine the condition of the connectors and other electrical parts. Electrical wires for lamp assembles may be repairable following vehicle-maker service information. Connectors and repair wires and terminals may be available and serviced separately. Lighting problems related to rear collisions may include blown fuses, shorts, or opens in the circuits. They may set a DTC, MIL, or driver information system message. Ensure service parts meet vehicle-maker specifications to reduce post-repair lighting problems -Electrical Inspection – check for cut, pinched, or corroded wires. Inspect for damaged, loose, or corroded grounds and connectors. It may be necessary to partially disassemble the lamp assembly to determine the condition of the connectors and other electrical parts. Electrical wires for lamp assemblies may be repairable following vehicle-maker service information. Connectors and repair wires and terminals may be available and serviced separately. Lighting problems related to rear collisions may include blown fuses, shorts, or opens in the circuits. They may set a DTC, MIL, or driver information system message. Ensure service parts meet vehicle-maker specifications to reduce post-repair lighting problems. -Closure Panel Considerations -Rear Closure Panels – the closure panels on the rear of the vehicles vary in design and construction material. Vehicle makers widely differ in what they include on the deck lid or lift gate -Closure Panel Construction – rear closure panels made of composites, aluminum, or high-strength steel present greater repair challenges compared to a mild steel part. Some rear closure panels may have magnesium inner frame which cannot be straightened or welded. Composite or plastic closure panels may permit outer panel repairs. However, if the inner frame is damaged, they are generally not repaired due to the design of the part -Closure Panel Inspection – when inspecting rear closure panels, look for signs of damage to the outer panel and inner frame. Inspect panel gaps and verify proper operation when opening and closing. Damage to a closure panel may cause the gaps to be off. Ensure any power open/close features are functional, as well as remote and hands-free operation. Inspect hinges, latches, locks, strikers, alignment guides, support struts, glass and trim for signs of damage. additional, this damage may affect the gaps of adjacent panels. Check the weatherstripping for proper sealing and be sure to verify operation of any attached accessories such as lighting, rear wipers, and cameras -Closure Panel Repair – repairability of rear closure panels depends on the construction material, extent, and location of damage, as well as access to the backside of the panel. Outer panels have the greatest opportunity for repair. Damage that extends to the inner frame is difficult to access and restore to its original shape. This typically requires complete part replacement. Some vehicles are equipped with a rear spare tire carrier which is in close proximity or attached to the rear closure panel. Inspect the spare tire carrier and attachment points for damage -Closure Panel Replacement – most rear closure panels are serviced as an assembly. Some vehicle makers may have a serviceable outer panel which is attached with adhesives and a hem flange similar to a door skin. When replacing a rear closure panel assembly, it may be necessary to transfer undamaged glass, parts, and accessories. In addition, you may need to seam seal the new part. Depending on vehicle options, you may need to complete programming, calibrations, or both when replacing the rear closure panel Damage Analysis of Unitized Structures – Rear (1/2) (2 of 2) Rear Structural Damage Analysis -Rear Body Panel Considerations – the rear body panels have complex construction and repair considerations. -Rear Body Panels – the rear body panel is beneath the deck lid or liftgate closure panel. This panel attaches the left and right inner and outer quarter panel assemblies -Body Panel Construction – the construction of the panel may be made from multiple steel strengths, depending on vehicle design. For example, some vehicles have rear body panels made of boron-alloyed steel while other models may use mild steel. The rear body panel may be made of multiple panels and serviced as an assembly -Further Inspection – after vehicle disassembly, a more thorough inspection must be done to locate all the damage. rear body panels may have complex shapes to accommodate the rear closure panel, lights, bumper cover attachments, or weatherstripping. Inspect for any obvious physical damage to the rear body panel. Inspect gaps between the rear closure panels and adjacent panels. Look for any inconsistencies when inspecting the liftgate, hinges, and supports. Check for improper fit and operation which may include the rear body panel is damaged. Inspect gaps on tail lamp assemblies and the bumper cover which may also indicate problems with the rear body panel -Three-Dimensional Measuring – measurements is an important consideration during damage analysis. Three-dimensional (3-D) measuring systems help provide damage mapping to develop a repair plan, monitor repair progress, and provide documentation of vehicle measurements. 3-D measuring ensures the unitized structure is within specification indicated by the vehicle maker -Body Panel Repair – repairability of the rear body panel depends on the vehicle maker repair procedures, extent and location of the damage, as well as construction material and accessibility for repairs. Repairs may be limited due to multi-layer panel construction. In some situations, the complex shape of many rear body panels can make it challenging to restore and align the adjacent parts. Minor cosmetic repairs may be acceptable. However, UHSS rear body panels are replaced if damaged -Body Panel Replacement – rear body panels are usually replaced at factory seams unless the vehicle maker has a sectioning procedure available. Quarter panels or other adjacent parts may overlap and be affected when replacing the rear body panel. Installation procedures commonly include using spot welds and may also require the use of adhesive. Panel seams should be sealed to prevent moisture and exhaust fumes from entering the vehicle -Quarter Panel Inspection -Parts of the quarter panel that should be inspected include the: -Outer panel -Wheelhouse -Inner panel -Fuel door -Filler neck -Fuel label -Quarter glass -When conducting your inspection, be sure to inspect the seams for separation and panel gaps. Removal of the rear bumper cover and rear lamps may be required to inspect for all the damage. check the air vents for damage. verify the proper operation of ADAS and hands-free sensors which may be attached to the quarter panel lower extension. Refer to the service information for vehicle-specific requirements -Quarter Panel Repair – repairability of quarter panels depends on the availability of vehicle-maker repair procedures, extent and location of the damage, as well as construction material and accessibility for repairs. Metal panels can usually be repaired using common panel straightening tools and techniques. Foam or other materials may be located on the backside of the quarter panel and other inner panels. The foam location may limit backside access. Be aware that foam poses a fire hazard as well. -Quarter Panel Replacement – determine if the vehicle maker has a sectioning procedure available or if it should be replaced at factory seams. Consider the location and extent of damage, published procedures from the vehicle maker, and panel design. Replacing a quarter panel at factory seams is recommended by several vehicle makers. However, this replacement may require replacing the roof panel too, depending on the vehicle construction and flange design -Additional Considerations – a replacement quarter panel may only be serviced as part of a uniside. This requires cutting the new service part at specified cut locations. It may be necessary to remove and install undamaged glass during repairs. Common sectioning locations can include the belt line, the dog leg, the quarter glass opening, or sail panel area -Weld Bonding – some vehicle makers have repair procedures that use weld bonding to attach quarter panels. Weld bonding is the process of combining adhesives with squeeze-type resistance spot welding (STRSW) or gas metal arc (GMA) plug welds. Refer to the body repair manual for guidelines on location of the adhesive and welds. If you are GMA welding, check the vehicle makers information for how close the adhesive can be to a weld. Adhesive should only be applied where the vehicle maker had it originally. -Trunk Floor – trunk floors are generally constructed from a single layer of mild steel. The floor may be part of the rear rail structure. The floor may be part of the rear rail structure. This is because it contributes to the structural integrity of the rail and can affect how the rear rail collapses. For example, trunk floors often close out rear rail hat channels that are three-sided. The trunk floor may be one- or two-piece construction. Remember to inspect the trunk for any attaching parts and damage to those parts. The vehicle battery may be located in the trunk of some models and may require additional inspection -Trunk Floor Repair Considerations – to decide on the repairability of the trunk floor, you must reference the service information from the vehicle maker. In addition, consider the extent and location of the damage, the type of construction material, and the accessibility to complete repairs. Convolutions and compound shapes in the trunk floor are designed to absorb collision energy. These can limit repair in some situations. When determining possible replacement procedures for the trunk floor, note that some vehicle makers have sectioning procedures that may allow for a less intrusive repair. Some vehicles have a composite spare tire well that is bonded into the vehicle floor. Repairs may be possible using approved plastic repair techniques, depending on the extent of the damage. adhesive is required for complete part replacement -Rear Floors on SUVs and Minivans – sport utility vehicles (SUV) and minivans have a rear floor pan instead of a trunk. The large rear door opening allows easy access to the rear floor pan. This may reduce the number of adjacent parts that require removal when replacing the floor compared to a trunk floor in a typical passenger vehicle. Some SUVs and minivans have storage tubs integrated into the floor as a storage place for the seat when it is folded down. This storage tub may be bonded into the floor by the vehicle maker. If damaged beyond repair, the replacement tub is bonded using the adhesive recommended by the vehicle maker -Rear Underbody – the rear underbody structure on a unibody vehicle deserves careful inspection and repair planning -Rear Rails – the rear rails and crossmember form the rear unibody structure on a unibody vehicle. The rear rails also support the floor pan and trunk floor. When planning a repair, always follow vehicle-maker procedures which could include weld bonding or rivet bonding -Rail Construction – steel rear rails can be made from various strengths, depending on vehicle design, and may be closed out by a rear body panel, floor pan, and bumper bracket. The rails may be made from tailor-welded blankets and may be available as a complete sub-assembly. The same sub-structure designs apply to aluminum rear rails. in some configurations, the rear rails serve as the attachment point for a trailer hitch -Rail Repair Considerations – repairability of rear frame rails depends on the repair procedures of the vehicle maker. In addition, you must consider the extent and location of the damage as well as the type of construction material and accessibility for repairs. The floor and other adjacent panels may limit access for repair. Internal rail reinforcements may not be accessible to properly straighten if damaged. An access window should not be cut in the trunk floor to assist with straightening, sectioning, or replacing a rear rail -Rail Replacement and Sectioning – replacement of a complete rear rail assembly can be a very involved procedure. Replacement requires substantial disassembly of the vehicle which includes interior parts, mechanical parts, and adjacent body parts in some situations. Some vehicle makers have rear rail extensions which can be installed at factory seams. Sectioning should only be performed following the current published procedure of the vehicle maker. Considerations for sectioning the rear rail can include the possible removal of the trunk floor, removal of the rear crossmember, and multiple locations for sectioning Determining Overall Vehicle Repairability Condition of the Vehicle -Introduction to Determining Overall Vehicle Repairability – when completing vehicle inspections and preparing damage estimates, it will sometimes become necessary to determine the actual cash value (ACV) of the vehicle so it can be determined if the vehicle is repairable, or should be considered a total loss. When inspecting a vehicle that appears to be approaching the total loss threshold, there are several additional requirements to consider including: -Additional photo requirements to support vehicle condition and any unrelated prior damages -Obtaining complete and accurate vehicle ID information -Obtaining advance charges -Protecting the salvage -Completing the necessary vehicle condition/valuation request form -Photo Documentation – when inspecting a vehicle and preparing an estimate of damage, there are typically standard photos required, such as four corner shots, license plate, VIN, close up photos of the damage, etc. However, when it is determined a vehicle may be approaching the total loss threshold, there may be additional photos required to support overall vehicle condition, options, and any unrelated prior damage. It is important to understand the photo documentation requirements for your company to remember to obtain all necessary photos to avoid the need to return the vehicle to obtain additional photos that were not taken at the time of vehicle inspection. -Complete and Accurate Vehicle Identification – while inspecting the vehicle, it is important to completely and accurately identify the vehicle, including mileage, options, trim packages, aftermarket accessories, major mechanical upgrades, and tire tread depth measurements. Inaccurate or incomplete identification of the vehicle can have significant impact on the vehicle valuation. Mistakes in the vehicle identification and condition rating process will result in overpayment of the claim or undervaluing the customer’s vehicle, resulting in a dissatisfied customer who feels their insurance company is not treating them fairly. -Preparing an Unrelated Prior Damage Estimate – when inspecting a vehicle, it is important to differentiate between claim-related damages and unrelated prior damages. When unrelated prior damage is identified, it should always be documented with a fully itemized estimate of all unrelated damage. This estimate can then, based on company and/or vendor policy, be used to determine the appropriate adjustment to the vehicle value prior to making a settlement offer. -Secure Advance Charges – any time a vehicle is inspected and it is determined the vehicle may be a total loss, the advance chargers should be obtained. These charges may include towing, storage charge to date, teardown fees, etc. It is also important to obtain the storage accrual rate, which is typically a “per-day” expense. The storage rates charged per day are typically determined by the facility and could differ from one location to the next. -Protecting the Salvage – when it is determined a vehicle may be considered a total loss, it is important to take the appropriate steps to protect the salvage. This will help to ensure the highest possible returns when the salvage is sold. In most cases, this will require working with the repair shop or towing facility to ensure all areas sensitive to moisture are covered. In the event the vehicle was disassembled, keep all parts that have been removed with the vehicle, so they can be included in the sale of the salvage. Determining Actual Cash Value (ACV) -Determining Actual Cash Value (ACV) – when making a decision regarding overall vehicle repairability, repair vs. total loss, it is necessary to determine the ACV of the vehicle. This may be done a few different ways, but the most common are using a third-party vendor who will provide a valuation report, or using a combination of preferred publications such as NADA, Red Book, Blue Book, etc. in either case, the vehicle identification information submitted on the vehicle condition/valuation request form will play a significant role in establishing the vehicle ACV -Confirming Vehicle ID Information with the Owner – when completing a condition report, it is a good practice to contact the vehicle owner to review the current mileage, options, trim packages, any major mechanical upgrades, and prior unrelated damages noted during the vehicle inspection. This will help to ensure the vehicle identification information is complete and accurate. This will also help to ensure everyone is on the same page, which will help to avoid frustration for the vehicle owner resulting from an inaccurate valuation of their vehicle due to missed options or disagreements on condition ratings. -Completing a Condition Report – -When completing a vehicle condition/valuation request form it is important to know the condition rating system used by the vendor you are working with. Some valuation vendors may use condition ratings such as: -Major wear -Normal wear -Dealer ready -Exceptional -Other vendors may use condition ratings such as: -Excellent -Above average -Average -Below average -Poor -Note: knowing the condition rating system used by your preferred vendor and how to properly rate the vehicle condition within their system is critical to valuing the vehicle property -Reviewing the Valuation Report – when the final ACV report is received from the preferred vendor, it is important to review the report in detail to ensure accuracy. Some things to consider: -Is the customer vehicle information correct? For example, VIN, year, make, model, options, and condition -Is the information for any comparable vehicles used to support the valuation correct? -Are any adjustments made to the value of the comparable vehicles correct? For example, if the customer vehicle is a 2017 Corvette with 25,000 miles and a comparable vehicle found and used for this report has 50,000 miles, there would typically be a mileage adjustment to the value of the comparable vehicle to offset the mileage variance. Note: It is important to review the report in detail to ensure the vehicle information used to determine the ACV is accurate before making a repairability decision. -Using Preferred Publications – In some cases, the preferred method for determining vehicle ACV may include the use of one or more industry accepted valuation publications, such as NADA or Red Book. When using vehicle valuation publications, arriving at the ACV will usually include obtaining the published ACV from two published sources including all appropriate adjustments for vehicle options, mileage, and condition. In addition, this may require obtaining dealer quotes on similar vehicles available on their lot for sale, and then calculating an average value based on the established ACV from the publications and dealer quotes. Determining Repairability -Total Loss Matrix – in some cases, there may be an additional document that must be completed to show the calculations used to make the decision to consider a vehicle a total loss: The Total Loss Matrix. This form will typically include a calculation that may include some of the following items: -Salvage value – this may require contacting local salvage buyers to obtain bids for the salvage vehicle. There are also outside vendors that allow you to enter the vehicle information (VIN, Year, Make, Model, etc.) and based on this information will provide an anticipated salvage value. -Damage Estimate Value – this is simply the repair estimate total -Estimated Rental Costs – this is typically a formula based on the estimated number of days the owner would be in a rental multiplied by an agreed rental reimbursement rate -Advance Charges – this would be the total of any towing and storage expenses -Note: The total of the items would then be divided by the ACV to show the fully loaded cost of repair vs. ACV for the vehicle. Driven to Delight: A Culture of Excellence (X0040E-US.SSB) X0040E-US.SSB-Pre Test Who are our competitors when it comes to providing an exceptional customer experience? All of the above, customer experience competitors come from all industries How do we become a global leader in customer experience across all brands? Be mindful of every customer and delight them every time Who has Mercedes-Benz always been a leader in? All of the above (Engineering Excellence, Luxury, Quality) What is the primary reason for providing our customers with truly memorable experiences? Prevent customers from forgetting about the heritage of the Mercedes-Benz brand and our patents - X wrong Which of the following is NOT a tenet of the Mercedes-Benz Driven to Delight framework (Hint: Driven to Delight is about going above and beyond)? Add value - X wrong What is the Mercedes-Benz promise to our customers? The best or nothing Which of the following is the best example of a discovery question to get to know my customer? (Hint: Discovery questions are not yes or no questions) May I refer to you by your first name - X wrong The key to providing a personalized experience is to treat our customers? Like they are our friends - X wrong True or False: Customers can easily spot when a dealer associate is being fake or not genuine in their interactions? True What does it mean to “WOW” our customers? All of the above (Add a touch of luxury to the experience, surprise them with something delightful, make such a good impression that it creates a lasting memory) Why is it important to listen to our customers? All of the above (to make them feel valued, to get to know them better, to connect on a more personal level) “The Best or Nothing” doesn’t just describe our values. What else does it describe? The customers who buy our products – X wrong What do we mean when we say we want to “LEAD” our customers? Listen, empathize, add value, and delight them True or False: Dealerships with the most loyal customers are usually more profitable? False – X wrong According to recent studies, what do customers value most when considering a vehicle purchase? Customer experience X0040E-US.SSB-Post Test Why is it important to listen to our customers? All of the above (to get to know them better, to connect on a more personal level, to make them feel valued) Which of the following is NOT a tenet of the Mercedes-Benz Driven to Delight framework? (Hint: Driven to Delight is about going above and beyond) Share Knowledge - X wrong “The Best or Nothing” doesn’t just describe our vehicles. What else does it describe? The people behind our vehicles How do we become a global leader in customer experience across all brands? Be mindful of every customer and delight them every time The key to providing a personalized experience is to treat our customers? As they want to be treated What is the primary reason for providing our customers with truly memorable experiences? Develop more loyalty because lasting memories create lasting customers True or False: Customers can easily spot when a dealer associate is being fake or not genuine in their interactions? True True or False: A forgetful experience will increase the likelihood of a customer returning to the dealership in the future? False What has Mercedes-Benz always been a leader in? All of the above (engineering excellence, quality, luxury) According to recent studies, what do customers value most when considering a vehicle purchase? Customer experience What is the Mercedes-Benz promise to our customers? The best or nothing What does it mean to “WOW” our customers? All of the above (Surprise them with something delightful, add a touch of luxury to the experience, make such a good impression that it creates a lasting memory Which of the following is the most effective way to build trust with customers? Be authentic and sincere True or False: Dealerships with the most loyal customers are usually more profitable? True Which of the following is the best example of a discovery question to get to know my customer? (Hint: discovery questions are not yet or no questions) Why is safety so important to you Electronic Braking and Stability Control Systems Overview (1/2) Anti-Lock Braking System (ABS) ABS Operation -Anti-Lock Braking System (ABS) Purpose – during vehicle disassembly and repairs it is important to identify any damage to anti-lock brake system (ABS), traction control system (TCS), stability control system (SCS) or any related systems parts so the vehicle is returned to the customer in a safe condition. A non-structural technician does not typically complete brake or electronic systems related work, but this does not mean they should not have some familiarity with the parts, operation, and basic damage inspection knowledge as they may encounter undocumented damage or issues during vehicle disassembly and repairs. When conducting a visual inspection look for damaged wires, connectors, sensors, lines, hoses, modules, valves, pump motors or other system parts damage, and scan the system for diagnostic trouble codes. * If there are any unrelated issues or service concerns, this should be documented -Basic ABS Operation – an anti-lock braking system (ABS): helps the driver maintain steering control during hard braking, reduces hydroplaning during braking, reduces flat-spotting of tires during panic stops. Anti-lock brakes can release and reapply brake fluid pressure rapidly to axles or individual wheels. This control of brake fluid pressure is also known as modulation. With an ABS, stopping distances may not be shorter than with conventional braking systems, and it is not possible to diagnose ABS problems by judging brake pedal feel -ECM Interaction – an ABS has wheel speed sensors and an electronic control module (ECM) or ABS module, which monitors the rotation speed of each wheel. When the wheels begin to lock up, the ECM sends a signal to the hydraulic system that reduces braking pressure to that wheel. When the wheel starts turning again, brake pressure is reapplied. This happens many times per second and produces an action similar to manually pumping the brakes, except much faster, Front wheel speed sensors in the center of the front wheels. ECM under the dash. Rear wheel speed sensors in the center of the rear wheels -Wheel Slip – wheel slip is measured as a percentage between 0% and 100%. When a wheel is rolling freely, this is 0%, and it is 100% when a wheel is locked and not rotating. At 100% slip, the brakes stop the tire, but not the vehicle and direction steering is lost. Maximum braking occurs when wheel slip is between 0% and 20% At the end of the areas top n right. It is 100% On the left is Force On the right is Slip Ratio The ideal slip ratio is 20% -Brake Lockup – brake lockup occurs when the brakes stop the wheel and tire assembly, but not the vehicle, and the friction of the brake surfaces exceeds the friction of the tire to the road surface. This causes the tire to slip across the road surface, resulting in increased stopping distance and reduced steering control. Factors that contribute to brake lockup include: -Tire design, condition, and inflation -Driver pressure on the brake pedal -Road surface (blacktop, concrete, gravel, dirt) -Conditions affecting the road surface such as oil, water, or ice -Vehicle weight. The heavier the vehicle, the harder it is to stop -Vehicle weight transfer -ABS Types – there are a few different anti-lock braking system types used on modern vehicles -Four-Channel – four channel ABS: -Uses four wheel speed sensors, one at each wheel -Can regulate brake pressure at each wheel individually -Provides the best straight-line stability and steering control -Rear-Wheel – rear-wheel ABS: -Regulates pressure equally to the rear wheels only -Uses one rear speed sensor. The rear speed sensor is mounted in the transmission, differential housing, or transfer case -Improves straight-line stability in panic stops -Does not prevent loss of vehicle steering because of front-wheel lockup -Is often used on pickup trucks and vans. Rear ABS can also help reduce the effects of varying load and weight transfer on these vehicles -Four-Wheel, Three-Channel – four-wheel, three-channel ABS is most commonly found on rear drive automobiles and light duty trucks and vans. Four-wheel, three-channel ABS: -Uses two front wheel speed sensors -May use one or two rear wheel speed sensors -Regulates front wheel brakes individually -Regulates pressure equally to the rear wheels -Provides straight-line stability and steering control -An ABS is made up of several parts. -Modulator Valves, Fluid Pump, Relays, and Pressure Switches -Modulator Valves – sometimes known as ABS valves, provide brake pressure modulation for each of the individual wheel circuits -Fluid Pumps – transfer fluid from the brake calipers back to the master cylinder -Relays – are used by the ECM to control power to the fluid pump, solenoids, and motors in the modulator valve -Pressure Switches – signal the ECM of pressure differences in the ABS -Wheel Speed Sensors and Tone Rings – wheel speed sensors and tone rings create a signal used by the ECM to determine wheel speed -Accumulator (if present) – ABS with an accumulator will store hydraulic fluid under pressure -Diagnostic Connectors – diagnostic connectors are points where test equipment connections are made -Warning Lamps – warning lamps inform the driver of problems in the brake system or ABS -Electronic Control Module (ECM) – during braking, the ECM monitors wheel speed and sends commands to the hydraulic modulator -Integral and Non-Integral ABS – anti-lock braking systems are classified into two general categories, non-integral or “add-on” ABS, and integral ABS. -Non-Integral ABS – non-integral ABS uses: -A conventional brake master cylinder and power assist assembly -A separate hydraulic modulator that uses solenoids or quick-acting motors to modulate brake fluid -Non-integral ABS may also use a separate fluid pump to create high pressure for the ABS, and often mount the hydraulic modulator and fluid pump assemblies on the front frame rails -Integral ABS – integral ABS can be identified by a special hydraulic unit. This unit may have a visible accumulator, but does not have a vacuum booster. The hydraulic unit performs the same function as a conventional master cylinder and brake power assist assembly. On integral systems, power assist is available even if the ABS modulation system is disabled. The necessary power assist is created by the use of -An accumulator (pressure storage) -A fluid pump -Integral ABS systems are not very common. Non-integral systems are the most common ABS Damage Analysis -Modulator Damage – integral and non-integral modulator unit circuits may become collision damaged. Problems may include physical damage, as many vehicle makers locate non-integral modulator units on fender aprons, frame rails, or radiator core support areas. Problems may include -Cut or shorted wires -Damaged connectors -Damaged mounting pads and brackets -Damaged lines and brake fluid leaks -* Warning lamps may illuminate and ABS module trouble codes will generally be stored if damage has occurred to ABS parts -Fluid Pump and Accumulator Damage – fluid pump circuits and accumulators may be damaged during a collision -Inspection – collision damage to fluid pump circuits and accumulators may include: -Physical damage. On integral systems, the fluid pump and accumulator are generally part of the special hydraulic unit near the cowl. -Brake fluid leaks. Hoses and lines may be damaged, and sealing washers should be replaced -Damaged mounting pads. Many fluid pump units are rubber mounted to control noise and vibration -Damaged wires, relays, or switches that cause motors not to run, or to run continuously. Most ABS motors are not designed for continuous operation. If a motor runs continuously, damage to the motor or batteries may result -* Fluid pumps and accumulators on non-integral systems maybe mounted on front frame rails, radiator core supports, and rear frame rails -Personal Safety – any damage to the brake lines or modulator valve may trap pressure anywhere in the hydraulic system. Use caution and be aware of the location of collision damage and how the damage may have affected the hydraulic system -Wheel Speed Sensor Inspection – speed sensor circuits may be damaged during a collision -Visual Inspection – when wheel speed sensors are damaged, the warning lamp may present problems that include -Physical damage to the speed sensor -Damaged wire connectors -Cut or shorted sensor wires and shielding -Cracked tone ring or missing teeth -Bent steering or spindle parts, causing improper sensor air gap -The permanent magnet losing its magnetism due to the impact -Trouble codes being set by using different diameter tires (such as a space-saving spare tire) -Metal filings or grease sticking to the sensor. This will cause improper signals -Electrical Testing – visual inspection will find most collision-related speed sensor circuit problems. Some systems may require connecting a scan tool to monitor speed sensor circuits. Additionally, DVOMs may be used for electrical testing of speed sensor circuits to measure the following -Continuity between the sensor wires and ground. There should be no continuity -Continuity between the shielded wires and ground. There should be continuity -Resistance of the wire coil. Resistance should match the service manual specification -AC voltage output of the sensor while rotating the wheel. Output should match the service manual specification -* Speed sensor wires may be twisted or shielded to reduce unwanted signal interference -Relay Damage – relay circuits may be damaged during a collision or the repair process. Problems may include: -Physical damage. Relay clusters may be located on the fender aprons or radiator core support areas -Cut or shorted wires to either the coil or contact circuits -Poor terminal contacts due to corrosion or paint overspray -Wires backed out of connectors -* Visual inspection of relay circuits will locate most collision-related problems, but electrical testing may also be required -Brake Fluid Contamination – brake fluid absorbs moisture if the system is open to air or the environment. Moisture contamination will reduce the boiling point of the brake fluid and may cause a loss of brakes in operation. Moisture can also cause corrosion of system parts that may lead to failure. Brake fluid should be visually inspected and tested for contamination. Brake fluid may also be contaminated by the breakdown of rubber brake parts and improper fluid being added to the system Electronic Braking and Stability Control Systems Overview (2/2) TCS Overview and Operation -Traction Control Overview – traction control occurs when the ECM senses that one or more of the drive wheels are rotating at a faster rate than the slowest non-drive wheel. When this happens, the ECM sends a signal to the powertrain control module (PCM) to reduce the amount of torque to the drive wheels. If the torque reduction is not effective in bringing the slipping wheels under control, then the ECM applies brake pressure to the spinning drive wheels until traction is regained -Brake Activation – if the ECM determines that braking pressure is required at the drive wheels, the ECM closes a valve in the brake system. This isolates the master cylinder from the hydraulic brake circuit that leads to the drive wheels. Then, a second valve opens to allow pressure from the ABS fluid pump and/or accumulator into the hydraulic brake circuit, and directs it to where braking pressure is required. The drive wheel ABS circuit solenoids are then energized to allow brake pressure to increase, hold, or decrease -Traction Control Systems Parts – traction control systems use many of the ABS parts. These parts include the: -ABS/Modulator valves -Fluid pump -ECM -Wheel speed sensors -* The signals received from the wheel speed sensors are similar to the signals received during an anti-lock braking event. The information is used by the ECM in a different program to aid in acceleration (traction control) instead of deceleration (anti-lock braking) -Traction Control Deactivation – the driver may switch off the traction control system if desired. Once deactivated, the system remains off until the next ignition cycle, or until turned back on by the driver. This switch may be located on the: -Center console -Automatic transmission range selector lever (if so equipped) -Instrument panel -* When deactivated by the driver, the TCS will display a “TRACTION OFF” message on the instrument panel, or on a center console warning lamp. The message or lamp will remain lit until the system is returned to operation -Four-Wheel and All-Wheel Drive TCS – (this page was in Spanish on I-car, this will be broken English, I translated) on some four-wheel drive models, off-wheel drive road is managed by a traction control system that uses the brakes. ABS to slow down the drive wheel or wheels. With these systems specialized, it is possible to apply motor torque only to wheels that have traction. On some all-wheel drive models, traction is monitored and controlled using limited slip differentials with clutch packs electronically controlled that send torque to the wheels with traction. Some vehicles use these systems as an acceleration aid and only reduce torque as one of the last steps in the system’s attempt to improve traction. -Throttle Motor – the throttle motor works with the throttle position sensor to: -Control air flow into the engine -Replace the traditional mechanical throttle cable or linkage -Reduce torque output during traction-control events by closing the throttle. This is directed by the PCM. -* This configuration is sometimes called a drive-by-wire system. In a drive-by-wire throttle system, the throttle opening is adjusted by the PCM by varying the throttle motor signal -Mechanical Throttle Linkage – on a vehicle with a mechanical throttle linkage, the PCM adjusts the throttle opening using a specialized throttle-angle adjusting motor connected in series with the throttle cable. With a mechanical throttle linkage, the driver will feel a kickback in the accelerator pedal during a traction control event. -Indicator and Warning Lamps – there may be one or more indicator and warning lamps to show system status. These include the following -TCS OFF. This message is displayed continuously, as a reminder to the driver, when the traction control system is turned off -TCS ON. This indicator lamp will come on during vehicle start as part of the traction system self-test. It cycles on, then off with other indicator lamps and may be an icon. -TCS Active. This lamp will come on while traction control is required. The lamp may read “SLIP” or “LOW TRAC” to represent a slippery condition. -Service TCS. This message is displayed if a malfunction of the traction control system is detected by the ECM SCS Overview and Operation -Stability Control Systems – a skid happens when a vehicle exceeds the traction limits of the vehicle’s tires to the road surface. Stability control systems (SCS) assist the vehicle with maintaining control during a skid by reducing the amount of wheel slip during acceleration, and in harsh driving conditions. SCS also assists the vehicle with smoother starts and acceleration through all speed ranges without wheel-spin or fishtailing, while reducing the amount of oversteer and understeer when cornering. -Sensor Function – to determine what is happening during a skid, sensors provide input to the ECM. These sensors include the steering angle sensor, the wheel speed sensors, a yaw rate sensor, lateral accelerometers, a brake pressure sensor, and a throttle position sensor -Electronic Control Module (ECM) Function – the ECM is programmed to look for a vehicle’s correct path while steering through a corner. If the information being sent to the ECM does not match this programmed data, the computer determines that the vehicle is in a skid. Brake pressure is then applied by the computer to one or more of the wheel circuits to correct the vehicle’s skid. The ABS/TCS ECM is used to support SCS functions, these systems are networked with other vehicle systems to provide complete functionality. If there is a problem with one system, the others will likely be affected. -Yaw Rate Sensors – yaw rate sensors measure a vehicle’s actual turn rate. These sensors may be located under the rear package shelf, in the center console, or under the driver’s seat. When the vehicle changes direction of travel the sensor creates an output signal that tells the ECM the rate of change in direction, or yaw. -Steering Angle Sensor – the steering angle sensor measures the steering wheel position relative to straight ahead. It may be self-centering, or have to be calibrated after any steering alignment work is performed. Some models also measure the rate (speed) that the steering wheel turns. The steering angle sensor is commonly built into the clock spring assembly, but may be a separate part on some vehicles. -Lateral Accelerometer – a lateral accelerometer is very similar to an airbag system impact sensor. The lateral accelerometer sends a precise reading to the ECM that represents the cornering force that the vehicle is experiencing. The ECM uses the lateral acceleration information along with the steering wheel position and wheel speed information to calculate the desired yaw or turn rate. This is compared to the yaw rate data to determine if the vehicle is in an out of control situation. Lateral acceleration sensors are commonly located in the passenger cabin, but may be in other locations on the vehicle. Most vehicles use two lateral acceleration sensors Front Wheel Speed Sensors – center front wheels ABS Module – left side of underhood ECM – right side of underhood Lateral Accelerometer - driver seat area Rear Wheel Speed Sensors – center rear wheels -Skid Categories – skid can be divided into two categories: understeer and oversteer -Understeer – understeer occurs when a driver attempts to turn and the front tires begin to slip. The front wheels are turned, but the vehicle does not respond and continues on its original course. On front-wheel drive vehicles this may be caused by the drive wheels spinning too fast for the corner (too much throttle). Front-wheel drive vehicles can also understeer if a corner is entered too fast and the throttle opens abruptly. When a front-wheel drive vehicle understeers, the skid control system instructs the ECM to open or close the throttle, depending on the torque applied to the drive wheels. When a rear-wheel drive vehicle understeers, the skid control system instructs the ECM to reduce the throttle before engaging the appropriate brake circuit to correct the slide -Oversteer – oversteer occurs when a vehicle is turning and the rear tires begin to slide away from the direction of the turn. This occurs most often on rear-wheel drive vehicles with slipping drive wheels. When a rear-wheel drive vehicle oversteers, the skid control system instructs the ECM to open or close the throttle depending on whether the drive wheels have too much or too little torque applied for the situation -Indicator and Warning Lamps – the stability control system will have a dash lamp to indicate system status. A variety of additional safety systems are available based on the foundations of ABS, TCS, and SCS. With additional sensors, systems programming and networking of systems, vehicle makers may incorporate roll over protection, hill start assist, hill decent control, brake force distribution, as well as other safety and convenience options. Depending on options, a variety of additional controls, switches, dash indicator lamps and message center announcements may accompany these features. Pre and post scans will help identify system issues. * Reviewing the vehicles owners manual will help identify the different controls, dash indicators, messages, and systems Electric Vehicle (EV) Damage Analysis -Introduction – EV’s continue to gain popularity with more models entering the market each year. While there are many similarities, there are in most cases unique differences that may affect damage analysis and repair operation requirements. This course examines EV damage analysis using a generic approach compiling a broad spectrum of considerations that embrace the majority of EV systems. The information is not intended to replace vehicle-specific information resources, which should always be included when performing damage analysis and repairs on any vehicle. Having a good understanding of the high-voltage (HV) systems and parts, damage types, repair options, and service considerations can make for a more efficient analysis -Safety Precautions – determine if the vehicle is safe to start the estimate process. If there is battery damage, determine if the vehicle needs to be quarantined. Do not touch the vehicle unless the system is shut down or a qualified EV specialist technician gives the approval and puts it in a safe mode. Some vehicles may display that the HV systems have been deactivated on the instrument cluster. If there is any doubt about the integrity of the HV systems, DO NOT touch the vehicle. Wait until it has been inspected by a trained EV technician, and determined to be safe or is placed in a safe state. This is done by shutting down the HV system. There is always high voltage in the battery -Inspection Precautions – EV inspection, service, and repair procedures require certain safety precautions before starting any repairs or removal of HV parts. These are found in the service information and must be read before performing any type of work. These safety precautions cover personal protection and handling of HV parts. Do not make assumptions based on repairs of other vehicles. There are tasks that have safety considerations, like moving the vehicle. Some vehicle makers may have recommendations to move the vehicle with wheel dollies so the drive wheels do not generate electrical energy or damage an HV part. Not all EVs are the same, so make sure you follow each vehicle maker’s repair procedures. Understand the location of all HV system parts on the vehicle. The charging port is important for safety and damage assessment purposes. Note: Anytime it is connected to a charger, the vehicle’s HV system is active. -High-Voltage Shutdown-isolate the HV when performing an inspection on the vehicle. During inspections on EVs, if possible, perform a pre-scan before shutting down the HV system. There are multiple ways to shut off the high voltage. Let’s take a look at some of these in more detail -High-Voltage Shutdown Using Ignition – turning off the ignition generally shuts down the HV system if there are no HV system faults, and the vehicle is not being charged. Be aware that if the HV battery needs to be cooled or warmed, the HV system may automatically energize to perform these functions even with the ignition off. When the vehicle is plugged in for charging, the HV system is energized even though it may not appear to be. -High-Voltage Shutdown Using Other Methods – generally, if the low-voltage (12 V) battery is disconnected, the HV system will be shut down, isolating the HV to the battery only. Some vehicles shut off the high voltage when the 12 V battery is disconnected. Additional HV shutdown measures may include low-voltage control circuit disconnects under the hood and an HV battery safety disconnect. Note: while the 12 V systems are active, remote apps and scheduled climate control operations may power up the HV systems -Charging Provisions – Evs are similar to gasoline vehicles that enter a repair facility. Some may be full of gas, others not so much. In the case of EVs, they may be fully charged while others may not. Its important to think about having charging provisions in case the vehicle needs to be charge for: -Pre-and post-scans -Diagnostics -Road tests -Any repair that may need the vehicle to be powered -Some vehicles may come equipped with a portable 120 V charger that can be connected to a 120 V outlet -Work Authorization Procedures – some vehicle makers may require work authorization procedures that require a daily signature from an EV specialist. This needs to be done every day the vehicle is in the repair facility, even after the HV has been shut down, and HV systems are not being directly affected. -Pre-Scan – pre-scanning of an EV may reveal codes and help identify problems with the high-voltage battery isolation faults or other unique issues that do not exist with conventional vehicles. It is important to identify all potential problems that may exist early in the damage analysis process. Faults in the HV system may require specialized test equipment and procedures that can only be performed by trained EV specialists -Causes of Isolation Faults – isolation faults may be caused by: -Internal insulation breakdown -Moisture intrusion -cable or connector damage -Other sources within the HV system modules or parts -Diagnosing these conditions requires an exceptional knowledge of the vehicle systems, specialized tools and equipment, and specialty training on the specific vehicle. These are usually relegated to an authorized service center -Fault Conditions – some fault conditions may not be identified by DTCs. They are only detected by proper inspection and measuring equipment and techniques. One example is electrical bonding faults -High-Voltage Parts -Inverter/Converter – the drive motor requires three-phase, HV alternating current (AC) power to operate. The inverter takes the HV direct current (DC) power supplied by the HV battery and changes it to HV three-phase AC power. This is based on the driver request or cruise control setting. The converter function is to change AC from the motor during regenerative braking to DC to charge the battery. This module contains capacitors that store DC power for a short period of time after the HV system is shut down. It may be charged by turning the drive wheels in some situations even with the HV system shut down. These are typically mounted on the motor or in very close proximity to. Inspect for direct and indirect damage to the part, connectors, cables, coolant lines, and hoses -Electric Motor – the electric-drive motor is attached to the gear reduction unit that drives the axles and wheels. It may also contain parts of the HV system that are connected to it. Electric motors still need coolant to cool parts and oils to lubricate. Inspect the parts for: -Damage -Mounting locations -Damaged or loose connectors -Cables -Ground cables or straps -Coolant and oil leaks -Any other type of visual damage -The motor and gear reduction unit may need to be removed as a modular assembly to provide access when doing some body structure repairs. Similar to a conventional vehicle, EVs may require specific procedures, tools, and equipment to facilitate the repair. There are additional tasks in the event that the motor and drive gear assembly need to be removed. This varies by specific vehicle configuration -DC/DC Converter – the DC/DC converter takes HV DC and changes it to 12-14 V for low-voltage systems, control modules, accessories, etc. The DC/DC converter is usually under the hood but may be mounted anywhere on the vehicle. On some vehicles, it may be in a more damage vulnerable location. Inspect for damage, loose or broken connectors, cables, coolant leaks, and other visible conditions. Make sure the HV system is shut down and the vehicle is safe to work on before touching any of the parts -Charge Port – charging port locations vary. Some may be on the fender or quarter panel and others in the front. there is usually a charge port opening button on the dash and a manual or alternative opening method. These are identified in the owner’s manual or service information. Due to their exterior panel mounting location, it may be damaged in relatively minor collisions. Inspect the ports for direct or indirect damage. make sure the caps are not missing or damaged, as these may prevent the vehicle from engaging the charge connector. The HV cables connect the port to an on-board charging module or may connect directly to the HV battery. If there is any suspected damage to the charging port or cables, ensure the HV system is shut down before inspection or disassembly. When the charging cable is connected, HV may be present at the port. Excess moisture, water, or other potentially conductive contaminants may present a safety hazard -High-Voltage Battery Pack – the HV battery stores a large amount of electrical energy in the battery cells. The on-board, battery-monitoring system ensures the cells are maintained within their operating temperature and voltage during the vehicle operation. Inspect the battery enclosure for any signs of damage or other abnormalities to determine if service or replacement is needed. Not all HV batteries are the same. Therefore, specific procedures must be followed if removal is required. Some batteries are air-cooled while others may be liquid-cooled. If removing a battery that is liquid-cooled, the coolant needs to be drained or the coolant circuits isolated. Heaters may be built into the battery or located externally. Valves and pumps control temperature and coolant circulation -High-Voltage Battery Considerations – battery removal requires specialized equipment. This may include a lift platform table or special adjustable mobile battery fixtures. Some vehicles may require specific lift adapters to permit battery clearance -Service Operations – there are very limited service operations that a collision repair facility performs on the HV battery. These procedures are usually limited to a service part that does not require removing the large battery enclosure cover. Specialty trained, HV service technicians may be able to service some internal HV battery parts. This requires advanced training and a variety of unique tools and equipment. An authorized service center should be consulted as to what is possible -Sublet Considerations – vehicle makers may require the vehicle be transported to an authorized service center for any: -HV system inspection -HV shutdown -Battery removal -Other HV-related system work -Other Considerations – most of the hardware that attaches the battery to the vehicle structure is accessed from under the vehicle. However, there may be requirements to remove some interior parts, such as seats or other interior trim to access bolts that need to be removed. Generally, if the battery pack is damaged, complete replacement is required -Additional Operations – during the removal and installation of HV parts, additional operations may need to be conducted with the main procedure. This may include the removal of body, electrical, and mechanical parts to gain access to the HV parts. Another example is during the installation of HV system parts, the vehicle maker may require testing of the electrical bonding. A milliohm meter is used to perform this test. Make sure to follow the vehicle maker procedures to ensure all required tasks are performed. Some of these required procedures may require specialty training, tools, and equipment. Some of these may only be available at authorized service centers -Body and Structure Repairs – body and structure damage can affect how a repair is performed and if other tasks related to high voltage need to be performed. For example, if a vehicle has side collision damage, you will need to determine if the battery or other parts need to be removed for full access to conduct repairs -Special Tools – there may be special tools that are needed to perform tasks related to removal or testing of high-voltage parts. These may include the following: -Battey lift table -Fixture table for battery -Alignment dowels -Specialty test harnesses -Connector block-off plugs -Lock out, tag out devices -Battery cavity pressure tester -Milliohm meter -HV insulation tester -SRS – with certain collision situations, sensors on-board the vehicle detect impact and may shut down the high-voltage system. This is usually in collision events that deploy SRS parts. There may be a reset procedure that requires using a scan tool or other means. Some vehicles may have a pyrotechnic disconnect device that is: -Located in the HV battery or externally -Designed to isolate the HV battery -Accessible from the interior of the vehicle by removing an access cover in the floor and/or battery or may be located under the hood -Considered a one-time use device -Review and follow the specific vehicle service information for these one-time-use parts -Low-Voltage Battery- if a low-voltage battery needs replacement, the vehicle is likely to have a specific battery type and rating. Some vehicle makers may require specific batteries. These may be lithium, absorbed glass mat (AGM), or flooded cell. Make sure to replace with the current one because the charging strategy is based on the specific type. There may be additional battery registration procedures that require a capable diagnostic tool be used. This ensures the replacement battery is managed properly and is not over- or under-charged. Note: shutting down the low-voltage system shuts down the high-voltage system. It also isolates all HV to the HV battery, unless contactor faults are present -HVAC – the heating, ventilation, and air condition system )HVAC) in EVs function similar to its gasoline counterparts. There may be additional parts used to provide heat or cooling to some of the HV systems. Proper identification of these systems is important to provide a more accurate estimate and order the correct parts. Lets take a look at some of these in more detail -A/C System – similar to some hybrid vehicles, EVs use an electric compressor pump. It requires the correct service equipment and oil when service is performed. This avoids system contamination and possible HV isolation loss faults. The A/C may also tie into the cooling system via a chiller block. Chiller blocks are refrigerant-to-coolant heat exchangers used to reduce the temperature of the coolant for the high-voltage system. Depending on the part being replaced, the A/C refrigerant may need to be evacuated. Follow the vehicle maker procedures to ensure the HV and other systems do not get affected by poor service -Cooling System- EV cooling systems may use multiple cooling circuits with valves, pumps, hoses, lines, sensors, and other parts to manage temperatures in different parts of the vehicle and HV system. This is vital to the operation of the HV system. The cooling system may also be used to heat the high-voltage battery and cab. To cool the high voltage, the cooling system uses what some call a chiller heat exchanger block. Air-cooled batteries may use internal heaters in the HV battery -Cooling System Inspection – inspect the coolant reservoirs for loss of coolant, as this may be an indication of internal or external leaks. A pressure test may be performed on the cooling system to identify leaks. If the cooling system is low or empty and there is no sign of an external leak, coolant may be leaking into the HV battery enclosure creating a hazardous condition -Heating System – a coolant heater is used to warm the HV battery when ambient temperatures drop below certain levels. Inspect these parts for damage or leaks. Some vehicles have a safety built in so that if the coolant is low, the vehicle will eventually shut down. It is important to know how the A/C system is used for more than just cooling the cab. It may also be used to heat the passenger cabin if it is a heat-pump-type system. Battery and cabin heat may be provided by a heating module referred to as a positive-temperature coefficient (PTC) heater. The PTC heater has hoses connected to the coolant circuit and HV connectors for power. Some cabin heaters may use a grid-style PTC heater core. PTC heaters may be located on collision-vulnerable-locations on some vehicles -Other EV Damage Conditions – water intrusion into the HV battery and motor-drive unit due to flood damage is possible and requires part replacement. If water enters the battery enclosure, it may lead to HV fault conditions, corrosion, or other problems. While the risk of electric shock is minimal, risks do exist with flood damaged vehicle if not handled properly. Do not touch any of the HV system parts or remove the HV service disconnect if any water is present. The vehicle should be inspected, evaluated, and the HV system disabled and isolated by a trained HV specialist. Rodents may damage HV cables. This requires replacement as there are no repairs allowed -Post-Repair Scan – a post-repair scan ensures that all issues were fixed, and that there are no remaining DTCs. A test drive is also necessary to make sure everything is performing as it should after a repair. During the post-repair scan, it may be helpful to document the health of the battery and other live data related to the high-voltage, including system status Electric Vehicle (EV) Initial Inspection and Handling -Electric Vehicle Overview – EV popularity continues to increase with more vehicle makers entering the market. This, combined with continuing advancements in battery-power-storage capability and resulting range increases, makes EVs more attractive to consumers. As this trend continues, the likelihood of EVs showing up in more collision repair facilities increases as well -High-Voltage (HV) Battery Overview – HV batteries are used in battery electric vehicles (BEV), plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV), and most hybrid electric vehicles (HEV). HV batteries are assemblies containing a large number of battery cells or several modules with multiple cells in each to store electrical energy used by the vehicle. The most common battery type used is the lithium-ion battery. It has the highest energy density of currently mass-produced batteries and is the dominant rechargeable-battery chemistry used for electronic devices. It is also commonplace for transportation and power-storage applications. The batteries are safe if they are handled and managed properly and have no damage conditions or defects in the cells -Lithium-Ion Batteries – lithium-ion batteries are the main power source for electric vehicles. Lithium batteries contain an electrolyte that is integral to the storage and release of electrical energy. However, the volume of electrolyte in each cell is relatively small compared to a conventional flooded cell, lead-acid battery (12-volt vehicle battery). It is unlikely the electrolyte will escape the battery enclosure unless there is battery cell and enclosure damage -The Challenge with Lithium-Ion Batteries – the challenge of lithium battery technologies in electric vehicles is the unknown condition after a collision or other incident that may affect the battery cells. This energy is quite safe under normal circumstances. There are millions of these batteries in service with very low failure rate. However, in rare and unusual circumstances, HV batteries may experience cell failure due to damage or faults resulting in unsafe conditions. In the unlikely event there is an issue with the battery cells. It may take time for a problem to become evident. This is due to being packaged in an enclosure under most vehicles -Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) – vehicle makers may identify specific PPE when working with EVs and HV batteries that may include items such as: -Outer gear that is flame-resistant -Arc-flash protective face shield -Arc-rated hood -Class 0 lineman’s glove kit -Electrically insulated footwear -Electrically insulated mat -Respiratory protection -Storage bags -Initial Intake of an Electric Vehicle – the first step of working with electric vehicles is understanding the initial receiving, or intake, of the vehicle. This is an initial inspection and not to be confused with the damage analysis/blueprinting phase of the process. Look for obvious visible damage to areas of the vehicle where HV system parts, modules, cables, and connectors are located, as well as visible damage to the HV parts themselves. When inspecting or working on vehicles with HV systems, tehcnicians should be familiar with the specific vehicle, as parts and their locations do vary. This introduces different damage possibilities based on loss type and vehicle part locations. Only properly trained/qualified EV technicians using the required tools and equipment should perform work on these vehicles -State of the Vehicle’s HV System – during initial inspection, the first concern is the state of the vehicle’s HV system and battery. To determine this, ask yourself these questions: -Has the owner been driving the vehicle with no apparent issues? -Does the key fob unlock the vehicle? -Does the vehicle power up? -Are there any warning or caution lights or messages? -Does the ready light appear? -Is the vehicle capable of moving by itself? -There may be noticeable issues upon arrival such as damage caused by collisions, fire, or flooding -Battery Condition Considerations – when determing the state of the vehicle, it is important to inspect the condition and stability of the HV battery. Always assume the HV battery and all system parts are energized and fully charged. There are possible electrical, chemical, mechanical, and thermal risks associated with HV batteries on EVs. Note: Always check specific vehicle and battery inspection procedures to determine how they should be handled -Battery Inspection – some signs of battery damage may be dents, tears, punctures, or ruptures. Other signs suggesting the battery is compromised could be: -Evidence of a thermal event (Heat) -Smoke residue -Discoloration -Deformation -Melted seals or connectors -Metallic splatter -Unusual sounds -Abnormal odors -Heat – batteries work best within certain operating limits and may become unstable at extremes. The cells must remain within certain voltage and temperature limits. Overheating, physical damage, or improper charging can lead to instability. If a battery failure occurs, toxic gas release or fires may result. This happens when the internal chemistry of the battery reacts generating heat faster than it can be dissipated. With any fire involving lithium-ion batteries, clear the area, call the fire department, allow ample ventilation and stay upwind at a safe distance -Electrolyte Leakage and Odors – during initial inspection, check for unusual odors and leakage on floors and vents. Chemical smells may be a sign that there are reactions taking place. Electrolyte leakage can create toxic hydrofluoric acid and other noxious gases. The HV battery is designed to vent any gases outside the passenger cabin. Depending on damage condition, there is a possibility this could be compromised allowing an accumulation of hazardous gases in the vehicle cabin. In situations where this is suspected, the interior of the vehicle should be allowed to vent by leaving the doors, windows, and trunk open to ensure that no gases accumulate -Coolant Leakage – inspect the cooling system rservoirs to see if they are full, low, or empty. If low or empty, check for visible evidence of where the coolant is leaking externally. If there is no visible evidence of an external leak, there may be a coolant leak internal to the HV battery, presenting a possible hazardous situation. Any kind of fluid or moisture accumulation that involves the HV system parts or the battery safety disconnect may present an increased safety risk. It is important to not touch HV system parts if this is observed. -Moving and Storing – Evs that have indications of possible HV battery damage, fault conditions, or compromise to the HV system should be evaluated by a qualified EV specialist. Additionally: -Do not store a vehicle within a damaged lithium-ion battery inside a structure or within 50 feet of any structure, overhead wires, or other vehicles -Place a “Danger: High Voltage” sign on the vehicle -Park the vehicle on a surface that has been sealed for vehicles involved in a collision or place a drip tray under the vehicle where the HV battery is located. Note: Never attempt to tow the vehicle with its drive wheels down -Quarantining Following Initial Inspection – if the vehicle has any indications of HV battery instability, the vehicle should never be quarantined. This ensures the safety of the work environment and protects from damaging other vehicles and buildings nearby. The vehicle may require monitoring over several days to determine battery stability. If there is any damage to any of the HV system parts and the HV battery is determined to be stable, the EV technician will need to evaluate the vehicle and determine required repairs -Pre-Scan – after the vehicle has been visually inspected and the damage is not determined to be immediately dangerous, a pre-scan should be conducted to identify if there are diagnostic trouble codes (DTC) indicating underlying electronic systems issues. DTCs may also identify problems with the HV battery and other HV system parts. The technician performing the scan should understand the codes that related to the HV system. Some codes may identify issues such as loss of isolation system interlock loop, or other HV system issues. These conditions may present a safety or shock hazard -Live Data with EVs – it may be possible to view live data using a scan tool in order to identify HV battery state of health. This should be conducted by a trained EV specialist familiar with the specific vehicle. There are usually multiple temperature sensors located throughout the battery to monitor internal temperatures. The live data should report relatively even temperatures and within vehicle maker limits. Excessive cell voltage variations may also indicate a problem. Follow vehicle maker requirements for handling if this occurs -OEM Qualified Assistance – vehicle makers may have specific procedures set in place on how to evaluate and handle their EVs. This may include checklists and diagnostic procedures to determine if the vehicle needs to be quarantined and other actions to be taken. The vehicle may need to be transported to a qualified service center to be evaluated if there are issues. When working with EVs, ensure all OEM safety, inspection, handling, and repair procedures are followed -Preparing for Safe Handling and Inspections – vehicle makers are required to meet extensive safety requirements and have invested heavily to ensure the vehicles they produce are safe under a variety of conditions, including collisions. According to a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) report, EVs are no more likely to catch fire than petroleum-fueled vehicles. Research continues to take place to improve battery safety and capacity. It is important to have properly trained staff with the specific knowledge, skills, tools, and equipment to ensure proper evaluation and handling of a customers vehicle. EHS: Personal Protective Equipment (Rivian) Personal protective equipment, or PPE, has been around throughout history in various forms. Even everyday clothing is a form of PPE, but many jobs and workplaces have unique hazards that require additional protection, such as gloves, boots, eye protection and many others. This course will teach employees to identify the need for PPE, define the concept of a hazard assessment, things to consider when choosing PPE, and the different types of PPE used to protect all parts of the body. This course is intended for general-industry employees who, during their regular work duties, are required to use personal protective equipment -Purpose – this course is meant to give you an awareness of workplace hazards that require Personal Protective Equipment, or PPE&lt; and the different kinds of PPE you can use to protect yourself against those hazards. By the time we’re done here, you’ll be able to: -Identify common types of PPE and their uses -Identify specialized types of PPE and their uses -Be aware of your responsibilities when using and maintaining your PPE -Physical hazards in the workplace are nothing new. Whenever we come across hazards, we use the hierarchy of controls to try and remove the hazard. Let’s take a look at how the process works for removing these hazards. -Engineering controls are the first step, we can try to remove the hazard or isolate it from the work environment. An example of an engineering control would be removing loose electrical cords from the factory floor that could pose a tripping hazard -Administrative Controls – if engineering controls aren’t enough, the next step is to use administrative controls, which involves changing the way employees work to minimize exposure to the hazard. If a specific workspace is restricted to authorized personnel only, this is an example of an administrative control that has been put into place -Personal Protective Equipment – sometimes neither engineering nor administrative controls are enough to counter the hazards in the workplace, which where personal protective equipment is required. Personal protective equipment is equipment worn to protect from exposure to hazards in the workplace and reduce the chance of workplace injuries or illnesses -Body Protection – even your normal clothes are a type of PPE: they protect you from heat, cold and embarrassment. However, there are some types of clothing designed specifically to be full-body PPE. -Leg and Foot Protection – your legs and feet are particularly vulnerable to all sorts of hazards: stepping on sharp objects, being crushed by heavy objects, being exposed to excessive heat or cold, exposure to electrical hazards and slip, trip and fall hazards -Arm and Hand Protection – your hands are probably the most important tools you work with, and they’re one of the most vulnerable parts of your body. Gloves will be chosen based on the tasks you will perform and the hazards associated with those tasks -Leather and canvas gloves are good for protecting against cuts, burns and heat -Chemical-resistant gloves such as neoprene or nitrile gloves are good at protecting against certain chemicals -Fabric gloves do well against dirt, splinters and abrasions, and are also good for maintaining your grip while carrying items -Head Protection – head injuries are especially dangerous because they often cause permanent, debilitating damage or death. Both hard hats and bump caps need to fit properly and be capable of protecting you from the specific hazards in your work area Question – Which of the following can protect a worker’s head from not only impacts and penetrations, but can also rated to protect against electrical shocks and burns – Bump caps Lesson 2: Specialized Types of PPE and Their Uses -Eye and Face Protection – your eyes are one of the most easily damaged parts of your body, so its no surprise that your eye and face hazards are some of the most common in workplaces. Rivian requires you to wear eye and/or face protection if your job will expose you to airborne particles, molten metal, liquid chemicals, acids or caustic liquids, chemical gases or vapors, or potentially harmful light radiation -Hearing Protection – if noise levels in your workplace exceed 85 decibels, or if the work environment is too loud to have a normal conversation and the noise levels cannot be lowered, you’ll need hearing protection -Respiratory Protection – there may also be situations where you might need respiratory protection to do your job safely. This can range from dust masks to keep dust and other particles out of your lungs, to air-purifying respirators with cartridges designed to keep specific particles and fumes out, such as paint fumes or toxic vapors -Additional Specialized PPE – some jobs will require more complex PPE than others due to very specific hazards. The more dangerous your job is, the more specific and sophisticated your PPE can get. If you’ll require any of these types of PPE, Rivian will ensure you receive proper equipment and training to use it Question – at what decibel level will you be required to wearing hearing protection? 85 Lesson 3: Your Responsibilities with PPE Use -Wearing PPE- one of the most important things to keep in mind when it comes to PPE is that it only works if you wear it properly. It is important to keep the following considerations in mind: -Its ultimately your responsibility to wear your PPE whenever you need it -Rivian may take disciplinary action against you if you aren’t wearing PPE when required -You’re taking a risk to your own health and well-being if you don’t wear it -Well-Fitting PPE – whatever PPE you use needs to fit its body part properly. Comfortable PPE that fits properly will be much easier to wear, and will be that much more effective -Proper Maintenance and Repair – no matter what PPE you’ll need to use, its important to make sure you take care of it properly. Rivian will train you on the proper maintenance of your equipment when you receive it, but you need to make sure you follow those instructions -Hazard Assessment – many workplaces will change as time goes on. New employees, new equipment and new policies may change the way you work or the specific processes you need to follow to do your job. Likewise, new hazards may appear in your workplace, or existing hazards can dimmish, or become more significant as time goes on Question – which of the following is a potential consequence of not wearing PPE or not wearing PPE properly? Disciplinary action may be taken against you, you may become injured, you may injure others Question – who should you contact if you need to replace damaged PPE? Your supervisor Engine Cooling and A/C Systems Overview -Course Introduction – vehicles are designed to meet specific emissions and fuel economy requirements while providing certain performance, durability, and occupant comfort. To help meet these goals, the cooling system manages the engine/drivetrain operating temperatures. The heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) system provides comfortable cabin temperatures for the occupants. These systems share a few parts. Many parts are located in areas where they may be damaged in a collision. During vehicle disassembly and repairs, it is important to inspect the different system parts. Ensure nothing is overlooked and damaged parts are repaired or replaced -Cooling Systems – cooling systems help maintain proper engine operating temperatures. Heat generated by the engine is transferred to the coolant, which is then circulated through the cooling system, reducing the coolant temperature. The cooling system is often damaged during a front end collision, and making a thorough inspection of all cooling system parts is necessary. -Cooling System Function – cooling systems use a constant flow of coolant through the cooling system. Coolant is moved through the cooling system by a water pump; however, heat is removed from the coolant by the radiator and heater core. The temperature is controlled by a thermostat Air flow from the front (arrows). Radiator is the black line on the left. Cooling fan is behind the radiator. Head is the gray odd shaped parts on top. Engine block is housing the arrows that go up n down -Radiator Parts Assembly – There are numerous parts that comprise a radiator assembly -1) Radiator Core – the radiator core is constructed of small metal fins that are mounted with tubes that flow horizontally or vertically. The fins conduct the heat from the tubes and transfer it to the air flowing through the radiator. The cores must be in good working condition to efficiently remove heat from the coolant. If the cores are bent or plugged, they will not function properly -2) Side Tanks – one side tank will be where the hot coolant flows in and then is distributed to the radiator core. The reduced temperature coolant flows back into the system through the other side tank. -3) Oil Coolers – depending on the system, one or both side tanks may house a transmission oil cooler. The transmission oil cooler exchanges heat with the coolant in the radiator -4) Gaskets – gaskets provide a seal between the side tank and radiator core -Radiator Drain Valves – radiator drain valves are typically located near or on the bottom of the radiator tank and may be made of plastic or metal. The drain valve is also referred to as a petcock or plug. It may be threaded requiring multiple turns to open or may only turn a partial rotation to open. Drain valves that are turned in the wrong direction or too much can cause permanent damage. Do not use impact tools on drain valves radiator drain valve -Draining Procedures – when draining a cooling system, be sure the engine is off, cooled sufficiently, and the system is not under pressure to avoid injury. Water pump and engine damage will occur if the engine is left running without coolant. Remove the radiator cap to avoid creating a vacuum in the system. Watch for sediment, metal flakes, and other material in the coolant. If present, the system will more than likely need to be flushed before being refilled. * Always reference vehicle maker service procedures to identify correct repair procedures, precautions, and mandatory repairs before beginning repairs on any cooling system. -Radiator Damage Analysis – most radiator damage is obvious and easily identified. When inspecting radiators look for damage to the tanks and core like – punctures, cracks, signs of leaking fluids. There are other situations to consider when inspecting a radiator -Blockage and Bent Radiator Fins – blockages in a radiator can be caused by debris flowing through the cooling system, corroded radiator metal, and chemical breakdown of the coolant. Bent or missing radiator fins can be caused by gravel, birds, and large bugs, and will reduce airflow and increase the operating temperature. The radiator fins may be straightened using a fin comb. Radiator fin spacing can vary, so it is important to select the proper comb spacing -Coolant Leaks – leaks may develop on some radiators between the core and the tanks due to a collision. A collision may also damage coolant hoses and lines, which could also leak -Monitoring Overheating – after a repair has been completed to the cooling system, verify the operating condition of the system for quality control purposes. An engine can overheat due to many things, including -Plugged radiators -A damaged water pump -Obstructions in the coolant flow -Air in the system -A damaged head gasket -* A non-contact thermometer can be used to monitor an overheating engine -Hose Clamps – the two types of hose clamps commonly used for radiator and heater hoses are spring steel and screw band. A spring hose clamp is made of spring steel with barbs on each end. Squeezing the ends opens and expands the clamp. Special hose clamp pliers should be used to remove or install the clamps. The pliers have a deep groove that will keep the clamp from slipping out of the jaws. A screw clamp is a steel band with a screw thread pattern cut or pressed into it. One end of the band contains a screw. When the screw is turned, it pulls the threads of the band, causing the band to tighten. Screw-type hose clamps should not be used where the vehicle maker originally used spring-type clamps. This may cause plastic hose attachment points to crack -Types of Cooling Fans – cooling systems utilize two types of cooling fans: electric and mechanical -Electric Fans – vehicles may have one or multiple electric cooling fans. Electric cooling fans can be either a single fan or side-by-side fans. They use temperature sensors to determine when the fans need to be engaged to assist the cooling systems. The electric cooling fan can either push or pull air into the system. Typically, a cooling fan will run at a constant speed and direct air from the front of the vehicle through the radiator. If wire repairs are required, be sure to get the positive and negatives wires on the correct terminals of the fan. Wiring backwards may damage or cause the fan to rotate backwards, not cooling the engine. Most electric fans can start running at any time with no warning when the ignition is in the run position. Some electric fans may start running, even when the vehicle is off. -Mechanical Fans – mechanical belt-driven fans pull air into the system and are operated by a belt that drives the fan. Mechanical fans may also use a clutch that is engaged by a thermostat, and may also utilize an electric fan to assist with cooling. Vehicle makers are moving away from mechanical belt-driven fans toward electric cooling fans to increase fuel economy and efficiency. Clutch fans are typically controlled by a thermostat. The thermostat-controlled clutch uses a bimetal coil in front to sense temperature. Heat expands the bimetal coil, which opens an internal valve that reduces belt slippage. This in turn alters the speed of the fan. -Fan Shrouds – fan shrouds may have cracks, chips, or other minor damage that may be repaired. Removing a fan shroud may give the appearance of freed airflow, but actually it reduces the directed airflow and requires the radiator to work harder to cool. Airflow under the hood helps cool the engine, coolant hoses, and radiator -Coolant Flow Through a Surge Tank – cooling systems may use a surge tank. Depending upon the vehicle maker, these tanks may also be called expansion or degas tanks. The tank provides a space for coolant expansion when it gets hot. It separates air from the coolant and is under pressure when the vehicle is running, and the engine is at temperature. The tank has a cap that functions like a radiator cap. This tank is also used to hold extra coolant and should never be filled beyond the fill line. -Surge Tank Inspection – inspect surge tanks for -Proper sealing caps -Visible damage -Correct fluid levels -* Do not repair the cap or surge tank due to high tank pressure and heat. Do not open surge tanks until after the system has cooled. This allows the system to depressurize, preventing hot coolant from spraying out of the tank -Overflow Tank Operation and Inspection – overflow tanks also play a pivotal role in proper cooling system. However, their function within the system differs greatly from surge tanks, as well as the precautions that must be taken when working with them -Coolant Flow in an Overflow System – some cooling systems use an overflow tank. Overflow tanks are not under pressure and are not subjected to high coolant temperatures. -Overflow Tank Inspection – when inspecting overflow tanks, look for proper sealing as the opening on top of the tank must be sealed. Check for the proper fluid level since fluid levels will change depending on the temperature of the engine. Look for sediment, as overflow bottles can collect sediment due to limited coolant flow and movement. Also, pay attention to visible damage. If damaged, plastic repairs may be performed on items such as overflow coolant bottles because the tank is not under pressure or the coolant is not at a high temperature. -Water Pump Types and Considerations – water pumps circulate coolant through the engine and cooling system. Water pumps can be driven by belts, electric motors, and gear. Water pumps that are used for primarily cooling are generally centrifugal and are mechanically driven. Auxiliary or secondary water pumps are generally electrically powered. The weep hole on a water pump allows coolant to leak when internal seals or bearings are beginning to fail and must be inspected. The leaking means that the water pump needs to be replaced. If it is not replaced, the impeller can grind into the engine block and cause damage. Weep hole on top left. Centrifugal on top right. Gear-Driven on bottom left. Electric on bottom right. -Belt Types – engine-driven accessories, including water pumps, may use one or more of the following belt types. -Serpentine belt – is used as the primary drive belt on many late model vehicles. This type of belt has lateral grooves that hold it on the pulleys -V-belt – is most commonly used on early model vehicles. These belts have a profile shaped like a “V”, and are used to run one or two accessories -Timing belt – can be rounded or square and have cogs that run perpendicular to the belt length. A timing belt can have two different styles of teeth that cannot be interchanged. Serpentine – left. V-belt – top right. Timing – bottom right -Belt Inspection – when inspecting belts, make sure the belt tensioners are operating properly. Also, check for -Lateral cracks -Cracks that extend to the nylon cords -Fraying of the belt -Pieces missing from the belt -* Replace the belt if any of these conditions exist -Thermostats – a thermostat helps manage engine temperature by controlling the flow of coolant to the radiator by opening and closing as the engine temperature changes. Thermostats are usually located in a housing on the engine with a hose connected to the radiator but may also be integrated into the water pump housing, on the intake, the cylinder head, or in the upper or lower radiator hose. Thermostat housings can be made from aluminum, steel, or plastic/composite -Coolant Sensors – coolant sensors monitor the engine coolant temperature and level. Multiple sensors may be used. Coolant level sensors are located in the coolant tank. Coolant temperature sensors are usually on the engine but may also be located in the radiator. If a sensor, connector, or any associated wiring is damaged, the engine may not run properly and may overheat as the cooling fans are not commanded to turn on when needed. -Heater System Parts – the two main parts that make up a heater system include the heater core and heater valves -Heater Core – a heater core is typically made of aluminum or brass and may have plastic end tanks similar to a radiator. Hot coolant flows through the core to warm the passenger cabin air. Heater cores are usually mounted behind the dashboard in the passenger cabin. If the heater core is leaking, there may be coolant leaking out of the A/C drain under the vehicle and/or dripping on the interior floor -Heater Valves – heater valves are operated by a cable, vacuum, or electronically. They prevent hot coolant from entering the heater core of the vehicle when it is not needed. When a heater shutoff valve is opened, coolant flows from the output side of the water pump, through the coolant lines, to the heater shutoff valve, through the heater core, and back to the engine. -Coolant Hoses and Lines – coolant hoses and lines are designed to carry coolant at system operating temperatures and pressures. Hoses are generally made of rubber which is flexible and easier to route within the system where some movement is necessary. Lines may be made of steel, aluminum, or plastic. These rigid lines are designed to be routed without risk of pinching and limiting coolant flow. Lines and hoses should be inspected for damage, metal lines should be inspected for possible corrosion issues as well. -Coolant – there are a variety of different coolants. Vehicle makers may identify a specific type to reduce internal part corrosion and maximize the life of the cooling system and engine parts. Use the type of coolant that is specified by the vehicle maker. -Coolant and Water Mixes – some coolants are ready to use and others require dilution with water to obtain the desired boil over and freeze protection, usually 50/50 in most climates. Refer to the product maker instructions to determine the appropriate mixture ratio. Never use just water except if flushing the system. It is not recommended to mix different coolants as they may not be compatible. Even coolants that look the same may not be compatible. -Refilling and Bleeding a System – when refilling a cooling system, always reference vehicle maker service information to identify recommended procedures, precautions, and service requirements. It is important that there is not trapped air in the system as engine or other part damage may occur. Some cooling systems have air bleed valves which should be opened to allow trapped air to escape. Ensure the valve is closed after filling the system. Hybrid and electric vehicles may have more than one cooling system. Some cooling systems may require a scan tool to activate valves and/or pumps during refill. Engine Cooling and A/C Systems Overview -Basic A/C System Operation and Refrigerant Flow – an air conditioning (A/C) system removes heat from the vehicle passenger compartment by circulating refrigerant through the system. The evaporator core is in the passenger cabin area and absorbs heat. The refrigerant is pumped out to the condenser where it releases heat, and then it is routed back to the evaporator. As the refrigerant circulates, it is changing from a gaseous state to a liquid state and back. It also changes pressure. There are two common types. Both contain desiccant to remove moisture from the system. Moisture can damage the system and cause insufficient cooling -Accumulator A/C – blue arrows – low pressure gas Blue – low pressure mist Red arrows – high pressure gas Red – high pressure liquid Receiver/Drier System – Blue arrows – low pressure gas Blue – low pressure mist Red arrows – high pressure gas Red – high pressure liquid -A/C Systems Inspection and Testing – a visual inspection of the A/C system should be done to identify any obvious breach in the system parts. If no issues are found, turn the system on to verify the system is working properly. This may include measuring the air temperature at the outlet vents on the dash, and comparing the readings to information found in the service manual. The A/C system can be checked for leaks using an electronic tester. Refrigerant is heavier than air, so be sure to test the lower areas of the part being tested. Dye may be present or added to the system and monitored to identify slow leaks. Fittings and joints are the most common areas for leaks to occur. Inspect these areas first. -Compressor Operation – the compressor is used to create flow and change the pressure of refrigerant in the A/C system. Refrigerant enters the compressor as a low-pressure gas and exits as a high-pressure gas. On most vehicles, the compressor uses a belt and pulley with a clutch to externally drive the compressor, allowing visual verification of operation. Some belt-driven compressors are variable displacement and may not use a clutch. Electric vehicles and some hybrid-electric vehicles use an electrically driven compressor. The compressor requires oil for lubrication. The oil travels through the A/C system with the refrigerant. Electric vehicles and some hybrid-electric vehicles use an electrically driven compressor. -Compressor Damage Analysis – mechanical and electric compressors need to be inspected for damage -General inspection – when inspecting an A/C compressor for damage -Check the clutch and pulley. These parts may be replaced individually or as a unit -Turn the clutch to verify there is no roughness in the bearings -Check the shaft and seal for damage or leakage if the clutch or pulley is damaged -Verify the compressor engages when the system is activated -Check the attachment points of the refrigerant lines -Inspect the pressure relief valve, switches, and wiring for broken insulation or shorted wires -Check the compressor case for signs of impact. Impact could cause internal damage, leaks, or other problems -Inspect the brackets that attach the compressor to the engine -Check the compressor pulley for impact marks if the compressor pulley is in close proximity to a frame rail or other parts -Electric Compressor – electric compressors should be carefully inspected for damage to the case and wiring. Do not touch any of the high voltage wiring, connectors, or parts unless the high voltage system has been disarmed and it has been verified that there is not a shock hazard present -Condenser – the condenser in the A/C system works similar to the radiator in the engine cooling system. In fact, the condenser and radiator are commonly stacked next to each other. The same fan or multiple fans removes heat from the refrigerant that flows through the condenser, just as heat is removed from the coolant flowing through the radiator -Condenser Damage Analysis – when inspecting a condenser for damage, depending on the severity of the damage, straightening may be possible. Bent fins may be straightened by combing. If the condenser tubes are damaged, there are typically no repair options besides complete part replacement. Do not automatically anticipate loss of refrigerant when a vehicle has been in a collision. Depending on the damage and type of impact, an A/C system may retain its charge -Orifice Tube – an orifice tube is found on A/C systems equipped with an accumulator. As the refrigerant flows through the orifice tube, it changes pressure and state before entering the evaporator. The orifice tube may become clogged if contaminants are in the system. The orifice tube must be the proper size and installed with the arrow pointing in the direction of refrigerant flow for the system to perform correctly -Evaporator Damage Analysis – the evaporator core is not commonly damaged in a collision due to its location inside the passenger cabin. If an evaporator is leaking, there may be dye or oil leaking from the condensate drain on the passenger side cowl/underbody. Evaporators are not easily accessible and are usually inspected last. Dirt and debris can accumulate on the evaporator and lead to corrosion and leaks in certain situations. If engine coolant is leaking from the condensate drain, the heater core is likely bad. -Switches and Sensors Damage Analysis – the pressure switches and sensors on the high and low side of the A/C system -Should be inspected for physical damage including connectors and wires that could cause the system to operate incorrectly or be damaged -May require evacuating the refrigerant in the system before replacement -May have replaceable O-rings -Lines and Hoses Damage Analysis – when inspecting lines and hoses, kinks in the aluminum or rubber may affect system performance. Damaged lines should not be repaired, they should be replaced. Typically, A/C service ports are located on the high- and low-side pressure lines -Types of Refrigerant – there are different types of refrigerants used in vehicles. Refrigerant R-134a has been used in automatic A/C systems since the mid-1990s. Some vehicle makers are using R-1234yf refrigerant instead of R-134a in some models. R1234yf is flammable, however, it has been determined to be safe for automotive use. Vehicles manufactured before 1994 contain R-12 refrigerant, unless retrofitted to R-134a. The type of refrigerant will be clearly labeled under the hood of the vehicle. Labels may be found on A/C system parts or other under hood locations. -Refrigerant Oils – there are a variety of different oils available for A/C systems. It is important to use the correct oil to ensure proper compressor operation and life. When the system suddenly loses its charge or when service work is performed, oil will be lost from the system and must be replaced. Service information should be referenced to ensure the correct type and amount is replaced when performing service work or replacing parts. The refrigerant label will show the total oil charge amount. Adding too much oil will reduce the system efficiency and may cause compressor damage -Electric Compressor Oils – electric compressors in hybrid/electric vehicles have unique oil requirements. Introducing the wrong oil may cause a safety hazard as well as a system failure resulting in the vehicle high-voltage system shutting down. Only A/C service equipment designed for electric compressors should be connected to these systems Estimating Guide Fundamentals (1/2) P-Pages Introduction P-Page Information -P-Page Overview – the Procedure pages (P-pages) provide insight into how the database supporting the estimating system was developed, how to utilize the database when preparing an estimate, and how to read an estimate prepared using the estimating software and database. Other common names for the manuals containing P-page information include: Database Reference Manual (DBRM), Guide to Estimating (GTE), and Collision Estimating Guide (CEG). This course will focus on where to find P-page information, and how to utilize the P-pages when preparing a damage estimate -Understanding Your Estimating System – when using P-page logic or computerized estimating system, it is important to have a good understanding of how the database is utilized to support the estimating software. Some systems utilize an inside-out theory, which means that when selecting an inner part for replacement, the database will typically add the necessary attaching or exterior panels operations necessary to replace the inner part -Outside-In Systems – other systems will use an outside-in theory, which means the system does not, by default, automatically include the necessary ‘remove and install’ (R&amp;I) of exterior or attaching parts to the labor allowance for replacing the inner part. For example, when utilizing an estimating system with an inside-out theory and replacing an inner part such as a uniside, the system will likely include the labor necessary to R&amp;I the door(s) and attaching parts. When utilizing a system using an outside-in theory, the necessary R&amp;Is and attaching parts will not, by default, be included in the labor time -Accessing P-Page Information – there are a few ways to access P-Page information, including links to the information provider reference manual. You may: -Access the information for Audatex: http://audatex.us ; CCC: http://cccis.com ; or Mitchell: http://www.mitchell.com directly through links -Access links to the reference manuals by going to the Database Enhancement Gateway (DEG) website (at www.DEGweb.org ) and then selecting the “Estimate Toolbox” -Use links within the estimating system, which typically provide direct links to the relevant P-page information -Headnote/Footnote – in addition to P-page information, some estimating systems will provide additional notes within the estimating system. These notes are sometimes referred to as headnotes (H-notes) or footnotes. These notes include important information about specific parts, operations, and database labor allowances. You must be mindful of this information in order to produce accurate estimates. Note: H-notes and footnotes may only be visible to the person writing the estimate and typically do not print on the estimate -Labor Time Premise – labor times produced by the estimating system database are typically based on replacing new undamaged parts on a new undamaged vehicle. These labor times typically do not include any additional labor requirements associated with non- OEM parts and accessories or procedures necessary to gain access to damaged parts for the purpose of repair or replacement. Note: Labor or operations not addressed in the ‘Included/Not-Included’ list within the P-pages were likely not considered in the work time developed for that procedure -Effect Zone/Adjacent Panel – it is important to remember that allowances listed in estimating systems do not typically include the labor required to repair the “effect zone,” which are the surfaces adjacent to the repair area. This may include repair areas requiring welding, drilling, grinding, or straightening. For example, one information provider states “Replace labor does not include additional labor to repair the replacement panel or adjacent panels, which may become distorted, burned, or damaged by welding, drilling, grinding, and straightening.” Similar information can be found in the P-pages for other systems as well -Database Enhancement Gateway (DEG) – the Database Enhancement Gateway (DEG) is an initiative to help improve quality and accuracy of collision repair estimates. The DEG uses proactive feedback from the collision repair industry, and other “end users,” to the information provides that supply the databases for estimating products. The DEG offers users a more standardized and streamlined process for the generation of database inquiries. The DEG Administration serves an advocacy role, processing all submitted databases inquiries until they reach conclusion. The DEG also provides a searchable database of prior inquiries, links to information provider user manuals, video training aids, and blogs on various industry topics Included/Not-Included Operations -Included/Not-Included Operations – when preparing an estimate, it is important to know the labor operations that are considered to be included and not-included within the estimating system you are working with. This is important because these items may not be consistent from one system to the next. This makes it necessary to add the operations that will be required to complete the repairs that are not included in the database-generated labor allowance. The following are examples of included/not-included operations for the same part from three estimating systems -Digital images. Cant bring them over -Calculating for Recycled, or Like, Kind, Quality (LKQ) Removal/Installation – when writing an estimate utilizing recycled or ‘like, kind, and quality’ (LKQ) parts, it is important to note that the labor times and included/not-included operations will be different from times and operations associated with new OEM parts. Some information providers include a separate set of included/not-included operations within their standard user manual for commonly recycled/LKQ parts, while others provide a separate manual to address the use of recycled/LKQ parts. Note that CCC uses the Recycled Assemblies Guide to Estimating (RACE) manual and Mitchell uses the Assemblies Time Guide (ATG) manual Estimating Guide Fundamentals (2/2) P-Pages and Refinishing P-Page Refinishing Information -Commonly Included Refinish Procedure – the base refinish allowance from an estimating system is typically based on a single color applied to a new, undamaged panel. Refinish times typically do not include tint matching, correcting defective finish textures, or correcting surface imperfections due to weather conditions, application errors, or environmental contamination. Consult the P-pages for your specific estimating systems to determine what is included in the refinish times. This image shows the included/not-included operations from one of the estimating system providers for basic color coat application -Refinish Overlap – refinish overlap applies when two or more panels are refinished at the same time. This occurs because there are some operations included in base color refinish allowances that are not necessary to duplicate on additional panels being refinished. For example, a common refinish overlap formula: -Uses the full refinish time for the first major panel -Deducts 0.4 for each additional adjacent panel -Deducts 0.2 for each additional non-adjacent panel -Deducts 0.2 for each additional part with less than 1.0 refinish time -Note: Although the estimating system database will typically make these adjustments for you, it is important to understand the formula used by your estimating system -Clearcoat and Multi-Stage Finishes – in most cases, the estimating system calculates clearcoat and multi-stage finish allowances based on the paint code or finish type entered into the system. However, the formulas used to calculate these allowances are not the same, so it is important to review the P-pages and understand the formula used by the estimating database you are using. For example, consider these two different formulas for a two-stage (clearcoat) finish: -System A – -First major panel – add 40% to the refinish time -Each additional panel – add 20% to the refinish time -System B – -Set-up time of 0.6 with the selection of the first refinished panel -Add 20% of refinish labor to each panel for the two-stage finish Fixed Glass Removal and Installation (1/3) Fixed Glass Removal Fixed Glass Overview -Role of Fixed Glass – stationary glass, combined with the urethane adhesive system, is a structural part of the vehicle. This type of glass, also referred to as fixed glass, contributes to the strength of the roof and pillars. It also provides bracing to make the structure more rigid -Structural Role of Stationary Glass – stationary glass helps to manage collision energy. For example, in a frontal collision, a urethane-bonded windshield helps direct energy through the A-pillars and over the roof, away from the passenger compartment. The glass is bonded to the vehicle on the pinchweld. A pinchweld is formed where two mating flanges are welded together. This was done to prevent leaks that were occurring with gasket-set installations. Stationary glass that is not bonded with urethane adhesive is not considered a structural part of the vehicle, but all stationary glass plays a role in maintaining a rigidity and strength -Works with Passenger Airbags – another role for the windshield is to work with the passenger airbag. A deploying passenger airbag may: -Deflect off the glass -Use the windshield to deflect the deployment in the proper direction -Be rendered ineffective by loosening or forcing the windshield out of the opening if it is a poor installation -Stationary glass also keeps unrestrained occupants inside. Severe injuries or fatalities can occur when the occupant is ejected from the vehicle -Types of Fixed Glass – stationary glass can be laminated or tempered. Laminated glass is made of two sheets of glass with a plastic inner layer. The plastic inner layer is polyvinyl butyral (PVB) -Laminated Glass – laminated glass holds together when broken due to the inner plastic laminate. This helps retain occupants. Even though the glass holds together when broken, small sharp slivers of glass break ff. these must be cleaned up and vacuumed out of vent ducts during repairs. Some stationary glass may have a thick PVB layer, which serves as a sound deadener and is called acoustic glass. Note: Laminated glass may be used for windshields, some side glass, glass roofs, and even the back glass on some vehicles. This type of glass can also be repaired, to a limited extent -Tempered Glass – this screen shows a sample label, which is located in the corner of the glass, to indicate the glass is tempered. Tempered glass is heat-treated to increase impact resistance. The glass is heated to about 1,100 degrees Fahrenheit, then rapidly cooled. This type of glass is brittle, and will shatter if cut, drilled, or ground. The shattered pieces are typically not as sharp as laminated glass slivers. Tempered glass cannot be repaired. If previously damaged or stressed, the glass can shatter at a later time. This type of glass may be layered with two sheets of tempered glass. In the United States, tempered glass may be used anywhere but the windshield -Fixed Glass Features – fixed glass features include: -Tinting -Frit -Shading -Windshield park indicators -Tinting – OEM glass is often tinted. Common tint colors include blue, green, bronze, and gray. Extremely dark tinting that covers the entire glass is called privacy glass. Privacy glass can only be used behind the B-pillar because it reduces the drivers vision if used for the windshield or front door glass -Frit – the frit is the black band around the perimeter of most stationary glass, which helps prevent ultraviolet (UV) rays from deteriorating the urethane adhesive. The frit is made of ink and ground glass. Any light scratches on the frit may be covered with black ink or even a black felt-tip marker -Shading – shading on glass is a tinted, horizontal band located across the top of the glass. This is used on some windshields, though a larger frit is more common. Shading is made by darkening the plastic inner layer -Windshield Park Indicators – windshield park indicators are where the windshield wipers should be parked when in a resting position. The indicators are located near the bottom of windshields, and serve as guides for reinstalling the windshield wipers -Encapsulated Glass – encapsulated glass has a polyurethane plastic molding permanently attached to the edge. The molding is installed when the glass is made. Encapsulated glass is designed to help the automated installation of glass on the assembly line. A robot can simply position the glass in place without a need to install the separate molding. any glass part may be encapsulated, but it is mostly found on just the side glass and back glass. * Note: To determine if the glass is encapsulated, try pulling the molding off after the glass is removed. If the molding will not come off, the glass is encapsulated. If it does come off, the molding is either bonded on or a separate molding Fixed Glass Removal -Types of Removal Tools – types of windshield removal tools include the cold knife, long blade knife, power cutter, and wire cutter. -Cold Knife – a cold knife has a 90-degree blade that is inserted under the urethane and a handle, which is used to pull the knife around the glass perimeter. The cold knife is less commonly used today. This tool makes it difficult to save the glass and moldings and prevent scratches on the pinchweld. Modern windshield installations are flatter to the body with tigher gaps. A cold knife is still a go-to tool for some technicians, provided the glass is already damaged and there is no need to save the molding -Long Blade Knife – a long blade knife is used typically for reaching the urethane on the bottom of the windshield where it attaches to the cowl -Power Cutter – power cutters, which are commonly used for windshield removal, are wide-bladed, reciprocating tools. Unless this tool is used very carefully, it is difficult to prevent scratching the pinchweld and damaging the molding -Wire Cutter – came up in Spanish -Glass Removal Accessories – removal accessories for helping a technician replace stationary glass include suction cups to handle the glass without having to touch the edges. Suction cups are useful for both removing and installing the glass. Another accessory is the glass stand, which is used to set the glass flat. Stands should be covered with foam to protect the glass. Glass stands may be used to both clean and prime the replacement glass. Another useful accessory is the urethane trimming tool, which is used for final-trimming the urethane on the pinchweld just prior to installation. Lastly, paddle sticks, made of hard plastic, are used to paddle the start and stop seams once the urethane is applied -Fixed Glass Removal – before removing the windshield, clean and vacuum the vehicle interior to clean up any broken glass. As part of the process, vacuum the defroster vent with the blower on to remove and broken glass from the vent. Remove loose glass parts and slivers from all interior surfaces. Note: Wear safety glasses and leather gloves to protect yourself against glass slivers that may blow out of the vents. Put on the safety glasses before turning the blower on -Interior Part and Trim Removal – begin by removing the parts to access the urethane. Interior parts that may require removal include the rearview mirror. The mirror may be installed on a mounting pad on the windshield interior or come down from the headliner. If mounted on the glass, the mirror usually comes off, but the mounting pad, or spade, remains on the glass. Other interior parts that may require removal include A-pillar trim and other necessary trim, sun visors, and wiring for accessories that connect to the glass or mirror, such as navigation antenna, heating grids, or a radio antenna. On rare occasions, the headliner may have to be loosened at the front as well to access the upper pinchweld -Exterior Part and Trim Removal – exterior parts that may require removal for access to the urethane include the: -Wipers -Cowl trim panel -Other trim, such as the exterior A-pillar trim panel -Antenna, if it is in the way of properly removing or installing the urethane or glass -Note: Also, the hood may need to be opened -Common Windshield Replacement Steps – to remove or install stationary or moveable glass, follow the instructions given in the service information. When working with glass, it is important: -Use the proper tools -Not to damage paint on the pinchweld -Wear safety glasses and leather gloves -Note: An example of a common removal procedure includes, the use of a cut-out knife lubricated with water. When cutting out the windshield, use caution not to damage the paint on the pinchweld. A piano wire type tool may be used to cut the urethane adhesive. Use suction cups to lift the windshield. Trim the adhesive on the flange. Only 1-2mm of the original adhesive should remain on the flange. Remove the rubber dams and fasteners from the pinchweld flange. The rubber dams should be replaced following vehicle service information Fixed Glass Removal and Installation (2/3) Fixed Glass Installation Preparation Glass Preparation -Preparing the Windshield – the glass must be prepared for installation to ensure proper adhesion. To prepare the windshield, clean both surfaces with a mild solvent cleaner to remove any fingerprints or oil contaminants. Fingerprints may appear near the edge, if the glass was handled without gloves. Fingerprints may lead to leaks, and a solvent cleaner will clean greasy contaminants better than glass cleaner. Suction cups are also recommended to eliminate the need for handling the windshield around the edges -Common Installation Procedures – when preparing the windshield for replacement: -Inspect the spacer blocks and replace if damage. The spacer blocks position the windshield at the correct height. These are located at the lower corners of the windshield on the cowl. -Test fit replacement windshield and mark the location by placing masking tape on the windshield and the vehicle body. Cut the tape at the edge of the windshield. Trim the remaining the urethane to a 1-2mm thickness -Clean the ceramic frit with an alcohol-free cleaner -Glass prep twice around the windshield -Apply glass primer around the windshield in the area that was prepared with glass prep -Apply adhesive metal primer to damaged areas of the pinchweld -Windshield – clean the entire surface with glass cleaner. Clean the bonding area, ideally with glass cleaner in the same product line as the urethane being used. Do not use a common house brand glass cleaner, because some of the these may contain silicone. If the original windshield is being reused, remove all but a thin film of existing urethane adhesive (1-2mm) from the windshield surface by using a clean utility knife or razor blade scraper. If equipped, apply the new windshield acoustic strip. Some vehicles are equipped with the acoustic strip to aid in noise reduction. Note: Attempting to clean the interior side of the glass after it is installed could apply enough outward pressure to weaken the bond -Glass/Frit Primer – after the glass is cleaned, use a new dauber to apply glass/frit primer to the bonding area, which is approximately a ¾ inch (20 mm) area along the perimeter of the windshield inner surface. For new windshield installations, refer to the removed windshield to determine the location of the adhesive and where to apply the frit primer. Use care when applying primer – it dries very quickly and may stain the viewing the area of the windshield if applied unevenly. Depending on the product, the primed surface is good for a limited time. Always refer to the product maker information regarding this time. If the glass is not installed within the recommended time, the primer may need to be re-applied. Some primers may also require multiple coats. After application, allow the primer to dry for the recommended time. Do not use paper towels or shop towels to apply frit primer. Paper towels are designed to absorb liquids, not apply them. Towels may also leave fibers or particles that may contaminate the bonding surface -New Glass Considerations – some cleaning products create a foam when applied, and where the foam separates, contaminants are present. In some cases, contaminants may need to be scrubbed with an abrasive pad before reapplying the glass cleaner. Some product makers have a special foam pad to scrub the bonding area and may require special cleaners. Note: Primers used with glass replacement and adhesives are skin and eye irritants. Wear safety glasses and chemical-resistant gloves, such as nitrile gloves whenever handling these products -Dry Fitting – the windshield should be dry fit to the opening to determine the proper position of the glass an ensure the glass opening is dimensionally correct. When dry fitting, make sure the glass is clean and dry. Dry fitting over fresh cut urethane with a dusty or dirty windshield surface may contaminate the bonding surface. Verify that the windshield locator pins (if equipped) are positioned into the locator slots on the pinchweld flange. Mark the locations of the glass in the opening with masking tape, cut the masking tape in the center and then remove the glass from the opening, look for even gaps from side-to-side, and determine if support spacers are required for proper height. Note: When performing the final installing, the masking tape on the windshield and body will be helpful with glass alignment Vehicle Preparation -Urethane Trim and Preparation – the best bond to urethane is urethane, so when reinstalling the same windshield, a thin layer of the existing urethane is left on the glass and pinchweld bonding areas. -Trimming the Existing Urethane – when trimming the existing urethane bead on the glass, trim down to 1-2mm. this is most easily done with a tool designed for the purpose. Do not do this step until just before reinstallation. If it is done hours before, the pores of the freshly trimmed bead could close. The surface can be activated with an activator, but the other problems is that contaminants can fall on the freshly trimmed bead, affecting the bond -Urethane Final Trim – there may also be a thick bead of existing urethane on the vehicle pinchweld after the glass is cut out. The existing bead protects the bonding area from contaminants. Just before installation, final-trim the urethane by cutting the bead to a height of 1-2 mm. Minor differences in the bead height are not a problem, but try to keep this bead as flat and even as possible. Clean the bead after the final trim only if necessary, and only with distilled water. The minerals in tap water will weaken the bond -Flange Preparation – follow the adhesive maker’s recommendations and procedures when installing stationary glass. Always reference vehicle maker service information to identify flange preparation requirements. Note: When trimming the existing adhesive bed, do not cut down to the bare metal. -Foam Tape – open-cell foam tape should be replaced if it was used in the original installation. Foam tape is primarily for sound deadening, reducing the wind noise and vibration around the glass. From the inside of the vehicle, the clean line of foam is also more aesthetic than an uneven bead of urethane. Foam tape is available in 6 mm and 7 mm sizes. Refer to the vehicle maker’s recommendation for the proper size. Note: Foam-core butyl must be replaced with the same product. Do not substitute butyl tape for foam-core butyl. Note note: The foam strip on the inside of this pinchweld is from the OEM, and must be kept intact or be replaced during glass replacement Fixed Glass Removal and Installation (3/3) Fixed Glass Installation Fixed Glass Adhesives -Glass Adhesives – follow all vehicle maker recommendations when using fixed glass adhesives. Types of glass urethanes include: -High modulus, which has an extra rigid cure bead -Conventional moisture-cure, high viscosity -Fast-cure, which sets much quicker than moisture-cure regardless of temperature and humidity -Primerless, which does not require primer be applied to the glass. Primer is still required on areas of the pinchweld where there is no existing urethane -Nonconductive, which is required on some vehicles with antenna grids, defrosters grids, and other electronic systems integrated into the glass. The bus bars on the side of the glass may contact the urethane, which draws power and weakens the signal. -Note: Nonconductive urethane may be required on some aluminum pinch welds. Always reference vehicle maker service information to identify vehicle specific requirements -Adhesive Tests – urethanes are tested for different properties, including: -Tensile and lap shear strength. With both of these tests, two coupons are bonded. Tensile strength testing pulls apart the coupons vertically. Lap shear strength testing pulls apart the two laterally. -Peel strength. The urethane should resist being peeled off easily like tape -Viscosity, or the thickness of the body of the adhesive when applied. Most urethane adhesives made today are high-viscosity, which helps support the glass at the proper level while curing without the need for dam -Modulus, or how rigid the adhesive is when cured -Elasticity, or how much the cured adhesive can stretch and come back to its original shape -Conductivity, or how much the adhesive can conduct electricity -Note: Lap shear and tensile strength tests are used because those are the forces applied to a windshield in a collision. There are forces to both push the glass out (tensile) during the initial impact, and slide upward (lap shear) when the vehicle is collapsing -Adhesive Failure – urethane adhesives specifically made for stationary glass installation helps maintain the structural integrity of the installed glass. When pulled laterally (lap shear), stationary glass adhesive has a strength from 500-1200 psi. This is much stronger than other adhesives and sealants. Urethane adhesive has the consistency of tire rubber and it is designed to maintain vehicle stiffness and rigidity. Some vehicles require a stiffer adhesive than others. When an adhesive is put under stress, there are two ways it can fail. -Failure Types – adhesive failure is when the adhesive pulls loose from the surface it is bonded to. Cohesive failure is when the body of the adhesive pulls apart. A cohesive failure is often to due an adhesive being used after its expired shelf life. This can also cause adhesive failure -Failure Causes – when the adhesive pulls loose from the surface it was bonded to, there could be a number of reasons, including: -Contamination on one of the bonding surfaces -Corrosion on the pinchweld flange -Ambient conditions during installation, such as freezing temperatures -Material incompatibility – all products used should be from the same manufacturer -Expired products -Adhesive Working Time – as with any adhesive, working time is also a factor that must be considered. Working time is how long the technician has, after laying down the adhesive bead, before the glass must be installed in place. This is typically a consistent time. For fast-cure products, the working time is usually 18 minutes. Moisture-cured products may be affected by temperatures and humidity – the working time may be as little as 3 minutes in some situations. Always refer to the working time that is listed on the products performance data sheet. -Moisture vs Fast Cure – urethane adhesives generally cure from the outside-in. After a stated minimum time, there will be an outer skin that holds the glass to the body, but there will still be a liquid center. If a cut is made through a bead of moisture-cure adhesive and fast-cure adhesive, after a few hours the: -Fast-cured adhesive will show an outer skin with a liquid center -Moisture-cure adhesive will show no outer skin beginning to form -Note: Total cure time of the two adhesives also differs, but both types are dependent on temperature and humidity for full cure -Minimum Driveaway Time – the minimum driveaway time is the amount of time before a vehicle with a fixed glass replacement can be released to the customer. This time is reached when the adhesive has achieved enough strength to pass Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) 212 and 208. This may be as little as 30-60 minutes for fast-cure products. Conventional moisture-cured products may take 2-8 hours or longer. Always reference product maker performance data sheets to identify all necessary product information including driveaway time. The chart shown here procedures the minimum driveaway time for one brand of moisture-cure adhesive -Note: Glass urethane may take 24 hours to reach full strength, and longer for full cure. Information regarding driveaway time and full cure time should be communicated to the vehicle owner. -Adhesive Application – when installing fixed glass, bare metal flanges need to be primed as required. Use an approved glass urethane adhesive. Nonconductive glass urethane adhesive may be used, but it is not required. Some glass adhesives require a primer to be used on the bare glass. Ensure that urethane bead width and height will closely duplicate what was done at the factory. -Applicator Tips – the adhesive applicator nozzle is cut at the tip to the height of the pinchweld. The top nozzle cap shown on this screen is pre-cut. A special application gun may be required if using a two-part adhesive. Travel speed with the gun depends on the height of the pinchweld. The adhesive bead should not be above the height of the pinchweld. -Cutting the Applicator Tip – cut off the tab on the applicator tip when not applying urethane to the glass. The tab is for guiding along the edge of the glass when applying the adhesive and it will get in the way when applying the urethane to the pinchweld. Hold the tip with a pre-cut ‘V’ against the pinchweld wall to determine if it is the correct height. The tip of the ‘V’ should be slightly higher than the top of the pinchweld. If it is too small cut the ‘V’ groove more. If it is too short, make a ‘V’ cut in a tip that is not pre-cut with a ‘V’ groove. -Applying the Urethane – most applications involve applying the urethane to the pinchweld, not the glass. It is often difficult to determine exactly where on the glass the bead contacts the pinchweld, especially on the bottom along the cowl panel. Keep the applicator gun as close to 90 degree as possible. This helps force the adhesive into irregularities on the surface, and points the triangular shape of the bead straight up. Try to make the bead as consistent as possible. Most pinchwelds require 1 and a half to 2 regular-size cartridges. -Padding the Urethane – after applying the urethane and before installing the glass, use a padding stick to paddle the urethane. Paddling the urethane at the seam and on both sides makes a smooth seam transition and prevents leaks Windshield Installation -Windshield Installation Considerations – points to keep in mind when installing the glass include: -Avoid touching the primed area, even with gloves on – use suction cups -Try setting the glass in the proper position and flat the first time – removing and repositioning the glass may cause a leak -Press down to the desired height, trying to level it as evenly as possible -Do not slap on the glass, which may push the glass down too quickly and create air pockets in the adhesive bead -Keep the door glass slightly open until the adhesive cures – shutting doors with the glass shut may cause outward pressure on the stationary glass and weaken the bond -Note: A back support will help reduce back injuries when lifting a windshield or backglass. If possible, have a helper assist with the installation, or use a one-person installment aid -Post Installation – points to keep in mind after glass installation: -Leak checking is done shortly, if not immediately, after the glass installation -Leak checking may be done using the ultrasonic sound method. If any leaks are found, press down on the glass in that location and check again. If the leak is still there, extra urethane could be applied in that area -To prove that the installation was done correctly, document the installation -Ultrasonic Sound Method – the ultrasonic sound method involves the use of a special emitter that is designed to probe the exterior perimeter of the windshield and detect leaks. If a leak is discovered, push on the glass from the outside in the area of the leak. Be careful if pressing near or on a spacer, as this can stress the glass. After pressing on the windshield, test again. This method eliminates most leaks. If the leak persists, apply more urethane. There repairs work when the adhesive is wet. After the adhesive is cured, there may be more serious problems that may require glass reinstallation -Document the Installation – an installer, and the facility that contracted an installer, can be held liable if the glass is improperly installed and a vehicle occupant is injured. To prove that the installation was done correctly, document the: -Glass part that was replaced -Product maker’s procedures used -Products used, including the adhesive lot number, primers, cleaners, etc. List expiration dates, if applicable -Ambient conditions at the installation site, including the temperature and humidity, and whether the glass was replaced inside a facility or outside. List the driveaway time of the adhesive based on these conditions -Vehicle owner information and vehicle identification number (VIN) -Time when the vehicle was released -Note: Save the installation record. Installation record forms are available in brochures from adhesive makes Full-Frame/Unitized Structure Pulling Overview (1/3) Equipment Overview, Repair Planning, and Anchoring Equipment and Process Overview -General Precautions when Straightening – the process and equipment used for straightening a vehicle structure utilizes hydraulic pulling equipment capable of applying large amounts of force. Severe injuries can occur during the straightening process as a result of clamps, chains, or other attachments slipping, breaking, or coming loose, causing backlash. Warn people of the danger that exists if they wander into the path of the pulling chain when pressure is applied. Doorways that are in the path of a pulling chain should be blocked when a vehicle is being straightened. Check on coworkers to make sure they are okay if backlash occurs -Safety Chains or Cables, Overloading and Other Considerations – safety chains or cables should be used to minimize backlash if a chain or clamp slips or breaks. Blankets or tarps wrapped over the pulling chains can also be used to help reduce backlash. Avoid overloading the equipment. It is never safe to stand in front of, behind, or in line with the straightening equipment with pressure applied or if there is tension on the chain. If a chain breaks or a pulling clamp comes off while under tension, pulling towers can pivot or shift violently in the opposite direction. Stay alert at all times during the structural repair process -Overview and Safety Considerations for Drive-On Straightening Systems – drive-on straightening systems lower and/or tilt downward to load the vehicle onto the equipment. The systems may have an adjustable bench height for a convenient working height, removable or permanently fixed runways and pulling towers, and an anchoring system designed specifically for the equipment. After loading a vehicle, place it in park, set the brake, and use the wheel chocks provided by the equipment maker to prevent the vehicle from moving. Wood blocks, bricks, etc. are not acceptable as these could slip or fail, causing injury -Portable Straightening System – portable racks or benches typically have casters mounted to the frame rack or bench that allow the straightening system to be moved around in the repair facility. These systems use portable towers and may eliminate the need for a dedicated structural repair stall. Portable systems require a lift to mount the vehicle. This type of system typically uses universal or dedicated fixtures. Some systems may have ramps that allow the vehicle to be driven onto their benches and may also have a built in lift to position the vehicle at a convenient working height. -In-Floor Straightening System – in-floor straightening systems use tracks or pots mounted into the floor. The vehicle is anchored in the area with the tracks or pots. Straightening is done with portable towers and/or hydraulic rams that are secured in a track or pots in the floor. The vehicle may rest on its suspension or be mounted into the clamps for the pulling process. Some structural repair equipment utilizes a combination of the in-floor system and drive-on system. Access to the underside of the vehicle may be limited with in floor systems -General Steps – structural repairs require careful planning. These are the general steps that should be followed: -1) Measure the vehicle -2) Anchor -3) Pull to remove the damage using the first in, last out method -4) Monitor the vehicle closely to ensure that damage is not being pulled into adjacent areas and anchoring locations -5) Stress-relieve with tension still applied -6) Release tension -7) Verify: Measure the vehicle again. Measuring should be the final step of the straightening process to verify the vehicle has been returned to proper dimensions -8) Repeat as necessary, making adjustments to pulling angles as needed Repair Planning -Damage Identification – it is important to identify all damage conditions to help determine where to anchor and if initial straightening needs to be done. Anchoring generally requires that the center section be aligned. Damage is either direct or indirect. Direct damage is the area that had direct contact with the damaging force and is the most obvious to see. Indirect damage is caused by the collision energy as it moves through the vehicle structure and may not be evident without close inspection and measuring. It is important to identify where damage stops. The undamaged areas must be protected from the pulling forces by proper anchoring -Measuring for Damage – measuring for damage helps determine the extent, location, and direction of direct and indirect damage. This provides a map to help determine the damage removal sequence. Measuring should include printing the measurements. Notes may be written on a copy of the measurements when planning the sequence of the pulls and while monitoring the progress of the repair. These should be kept on file for documentation of the repair. It is important to know how to properly use the measuring system and know how to read the measurements to ensure that the vehicle is being repaired properly -Measuring Tolerances – vehicle repair tolerance is used during the straightening process to determine a specific location of a measuring point. Three to five millimeters was pretty common on older vehicles. However, this is not as common on late model designs where vehicles have much tighter tolerances. The vehicle must be straightened to a degree that allows all of the body panels to fit properly and so that the suspension is in proper alignment without requiring extreme adjustments. Some vehicles have little or no adjustment for some alignment angles, which will require more precision in structural alignment. Tolerances are generally tighter on newer vehicles and may require greater precision in repair -Best Practices – measure the vehicle over the entire length to help prevent overlooking indirect or previous damage. This may prevent unexpected delays in the repair process, especially if done early in the repair process. Working on many of the same makes and models of vehicles will allow you to get a better understanding of how the parts react during straightening, as well as a better understanding of dimensional build variations as you measure more vehicles -Material Strength and Pulling – dissimilar materials will respond to collision energy and repair pulling forces differently. For example, high-strength steel (HSS) and ultra-high strength steel (UHSS) parts can transfer energy to parts made from lower strength steel. Knowing the strengths of the different materials will help determine the repairability, and how pulling forces may affect other parts of the vehicle. Vehicle structures may have a mix of steel, aluminum, and composite materials, each responding differently. To help improve cycle times and ensure proper repair methods are used, ensure all materials are identified up front and considered in the repair plan -Work Hardening – metal becomes work hardened each time it is formed, bent, stretched, or compressed -Molecular Grain Pattern and Straightening – metal has a molecular grain pattern. These grains give the metal its strength and cannot be seen with the naked eye. When a metal part becomes deformed, the internal structure or state of the material changes. During straightening, parts must be restored to their original state and shape. This requires vehicle dimensions to be restored. In addition to restoring vehicle dimensions, it is also important to restore cosmetic appearance. If either of these cannot be performed, the part should be replaced - - top is undamaged. Bottom is damaged and there is work hardening around the top loop -Characteristics – work hardening causes an increase in metal hardness and strength. As a part becomes more work hardened, it becomes more brittle. Work hardening can occur: -Initially when it is formed at the manufacturing plant. The sharper the corner of the part, the more work hardened it becomes -When a part is deformed during a collision -During straightening -Where an area is kinked, the grain structure will likely be irreversibly affected and it is likely to have microscopic cracking of the grain structure. -Note: Different metals have different work hardening rates. For example, aluminum and UHSS have much higher work hardening rates than mild steel -Top is undamaged. Middle is damaged. Bottom is straightened -Kink vs. Bend – the kink vs bend rule is no longer as simple as it sounds. A part may not look like it is kinked, but it may not be able to be straightened without cracking. If the part is bent, but the thickness or strength of the metal will not allow for straightening without leaving an area of permanent deformation, then replacement, either partial or complete, would be appropriate. There are collapse or crush zones built into some parts so they can absorb collision energy. A part collapsed in these areas usually requires replacement since a straightened collapse zone may not reach the same way in another collision -Micro-Cracking – the stronger the steel, the less repairable it becomes. For example, a slight bend in a UHSS part may crack when straightened if it is able to be straightened at all. As a best practice, do not straighten parts that are above 600 MPa unless specific documentation exists from the OEM. This is due to possible cracking and tearing of the part and possible damage to adjacent panels. If straightening is allowed by the OEM, a dye penetrant should be used to ensure no micro-cracking has occurred in the steel. Some vehicle makers do not recommend straightening UHSS parts that are above 600 MPa due to cracking and tearing of the part and damage to adjacent panels. Pulling Direction -Determining Pulling Direction – one technique used to determine clamp placement and pull direction is to grab the vehicle and pull on it as if the damage could be removed by hand. The position of the technician’s hands would determine where clamps should be placed. The angle of the technician’s arms will help determine chain angle. There are a number of different types of pulls used to remove damage. The one used is dependent on damage condition, equipment type, as well as technician experience. Measure the vehicle to help determine pulling direction. Note: Damage is typically removed following the first in, last out rule, removing damage furthest into the vehicle and working outward -Straightening Length – a change in length, also called mash, collapse or short rail, is a condition where any section of a part is shorter than factory specification. Mash may be corrected by pulling the part in the opposite direction of the impact. Some mash damage may be repairable, however, depending on the extent of the damage, partial or complete replacement of the part may be necessary -pull direction -Straightening Height – correcting height misalignment commonly involves pulling the part forward in addition to upward or downward. This is because there is often some degree of mash from the collision forces. The forward pull also helps prevent buckling the part during the pull. Straightening height may also require holding adjacent areas. Blocking may be used during a downward pull to prevent adjacent areas from being moved out of specification. Sag is a term commonly used to identify a part or area that is too low -Straightening Width – sway is a term commonly used to identify a part or area that has been pushed to one side by collision forces, causing a width alignment. Sway may be corrected by making a forward pull that is slightly slanted toward the direction of impact. Placing a block near bends in a part helps straighten the part and keeps it from hinging further back in the vehicle, creating additional damage. If there is a buckle or deformation in one side of the rail, pull on that side of the rail, as it will likely be short and this may help remove the damage -Side Collision – older vehicles were prone to a banana condition when hit on the side and would require pulling for length to restore the vehicle dimensions. Pulling for length is not as common on newer vehicles due to the extensive use of HSS and UHSS reinforcements in the rocker panel and passenger cabin area. This creates a stiffer structure that is less likely to distort the same way as older vehicles did. Vehicles that do not have the same level of reinforcement in the passenger cabin may require pulling to restore length to return door openings to proper dimensions to achieve proper fit and door operation -First line is length after collision. Bottom line is length before collision. -Front/Rear Sections and Floor Crossmembers – the front and rear sections still need to be measured because the center section misalignment will affect those sections. The amount of indirect damage to the front and rear sections may be less than what was seen in older models, but it may still be present depending on the severity of the impact. Floor crossmembers located between the lower B-pillars can push damage to the center hump area (or tunnel) or to the opposite inner rocker panel. It may be necessary to inspect these areas on vehicles involved in side-impact collisions Anchoring -Purpose of Anchoring – anchoring holds undamaged points in correct alignment while resisting the pulling force and distributes pulling forces between multiple anchoring points. Generally, the more anchoring points closest to the location of the pull will receive more force compared to anchoring there are, the less force is applied to each. However, the anchoring points closest to the location of the pull will receive more force compared to anchoring locations farther from the pull. For this reason, additional anchoring may be required closer to the source of the pull. Anchoring also allows pulling forces to be focused on the area of damage. Note: Proper anchoring is essential for correcting structural misalignment -Anchoring Locations – structural repair equipment makers typically identify anchoring locations for specific vehicles. This helps ensure that the anchoring clamps do not impede the measuring equipment or process, and are positioned on an area of the vehicle that will support its weight. Anchoring locations may also be identified by the vehicle maker in the service information. Structural repair equipment makers may also provide special clamp designs or adapters that are used for the variety of rocker panel configurations -Anchoring by Pinchwelds – when anchoring with pinchweld clamps, clamps should be attached at each corner of the vehicle center section. This is because no one part of a vehicle can withstand the entire force of a pull. In fact, the four pinchweld anchoring clamps may not be able to withstand the force of the pull. -Additional Anchoring Support – additional anchoring support is often necessary. Locations for additional anchoring support will depend on the location of damage and the direction of the pulls. Adjacent parts, such as center section splash shields, fuel or brake lines, or wiring harnesses may require removal or relocation to properly attach the pinchweld clamps or access measuring points. Seam sealer or undercoating may have to be removed from pinchwelds to ensure a secure anchor point -Initial Straightening – initial straightening may be required. Anchoring locations may have been moved out of specification during the collision. This may require initial straightening to return the anchoring point to the proper position. This can be done by leaving the out-of-position anchoring point to the proper position. This can be done by leaving the out-of-position anchoring point unclamped to allow it to be pulled into proper position. The area must be properly stress-relieved to help ensure it remains in the proper location naturally before tightening the pinchweld clamps -Positioning Anchors – anchoring locations must be able to withstand the weight of the vehicle when placed in clamps and the vehicle is not resting on the suspension or unloaded. Some systems anchor the vehicle with the vehicle resting on the suspension, or being loaded. In addition, the anchoring locations must withstand pulling forces without being damaged. Pulling force greater than the anchoring strength will damage the anchoring location. The anchoring locations may require relocation if the center section needs some initial straightening. The original anchoring locations may inadvertently lock damage into the center section if the anchor is in an area that needs to be moved -Alternate Anchoring Methods – some vehicles do not have pinchwelds, have pinchwelds which are too small for proper anchoring, or have pinchwelds that are irregularly shaped, angled, or horizontal. Anchoring vehicles without pinchwelds requires special adapters. These are generally available from the structural repair equipment maker. Note: Identify if special anchor clamps are needed before the vehicle enters the production stream to prevent delays in the repair process -Additional Anchoring Support – the rocker panel may not have strength to withstand the pulling forces alone. Additional anchoring may be necessary to support the vehicle during the straightening process. This may be done using: -Fixtures -Chains -Hydraulic rams -Wooden blocks -Note: Anchoring and blocking must be done in strong areas of the vehicle that will not bend or distort. Fixtures or wooden blocks can act as a fulcrum at the point where they are positioned. When determining where to place additional anchoring, take into consideration which parts of the vehicle need to move and which should not move. Jack stands should not be used to provide additional anchoring support -Considering Part Removal – when determining if a part should be removed or left on the vehicle, consider if the part can be used as an attachment point for pulling to help distribute pulling forces. If the part has considerable damage, it may lock other damage in and may not have the strength to be useful during the repair process. Does the part add structural integrity to the vehicle during the pulling process. Consider if the part will cause damage to undamaged areas of the vehicle during the straightening process. Pulling on the part should not cause additional damage to undamaged areas of the vehicle -Implications of Leaving a Part in Place – leaving a part on a vehicle instead of removing it may: -Restrict other parts from being pulled into proper position -Restrict the access to inner panels -Restrict access or hinder the attachment of anchors and straightening equipment -Cause adjacent panels to be pulled out of alignment -Note: Panels work hardened from a collision will require more pulling force to remove the damage Full-Frame/Unitized Structure Pulling Overview (2/3) Straightening Equipment Pulling Attachments -Clamps – there are a variety of clamps available for structural repairs. Having several clamps available may improve efficiency with the straightening process. For example, stopping a pull to remove a clamp and position it to another location is not the most efficient process -Bolt-On Clamps and Plates – attaching the chain to vehicle is done with special clamps designed for the part being pulled. Types of pulling hardware include bolt-on clamps, which bolt to a flange. Bolt-on clamps can be used for multi-directional pulls. This means that one clamp may be used to make both an upward and outward pull. Typical designs include one or two pairs of jaws. Bolt-on plates (draw bars or hole bars) have a variety of holes drilled into a steel plate. Some are designed to match general bolt patterns commonly found on a vehicle’s structure. Bolt-on plates may be designed to be used on specific parts, such as rails and strut towers, or the may be designed for a specific vehicle -Self-Tightening Jaw Clamps – self-tightening jaw clamps have a wedge and eye sandwiched in a clamp. A chain is attached to the eye. When tension is applied, the clamp tightens on the part. Expanding, self-tightening enclosed rail clamps are positioned inside the end of a rail. As tension is applied to the eye of this clamp, the jaws expand, and tightens within the rail, allowing the rail to be pulled. These are typically designed for vehicle specific applications -Hooks – hooks are available in a variety of configurations to access different areas, such as hinge pillars, inside wheel wells, or under rocker panels. Additional types of hooks are used to extend or shorten pulling chains or anchor the vehicle to the rack -Clamp Maintenance – clamp bolts will wear over time. Be sure to inspect bolts and replace them if damaged or stretched. A bolt that is not threading properly may be an indication that it is worn and should be replaced. Inspect the jaws of the pulling hardware for seam sealer or other types of material buildup that may cause it to slip during a pull. A wire brush or solvents may be required to remove residue from the jaws of the pulling hardware. Note: Ensure clamps are properly maintained to help minimize the chance for them to slip. Damage to equipment, vehicle, or personal injury may result from a clamp that slips off during the pull -Attachment Points – some examples of pulling attachment points include: -Bumper reinforcement mounting locations -Pinchweld flanges, such as along rails -The ends of rails -Damaged sheet metal. On parts that will be replaced, it may be beneficial to weld the pinchweld flanges together to prevent it from tearing apart during the pull -Some mechanical, steering, and suspension mounting points. However, this only applies to the mounting points on the vehicle structure. Straightening equipment should not be attached to steering and suspension parts -Positioning Clamps on the Vehicle – vehicle structures may require multiple clamps to distribute the pulling force and prevent tearing the metal. Considerations for the placement of pulling clamps include: -Location of the damage -Ability to attach the clamp to the vehicle structure -Ability of the part to withstand the force of the pull -Making sure undamaged parts do not become damaged -Clamp Attachment Considerations – clamps should be placed in positions that allow the part to move without causing more damage. Set the pulling clamp so that an imaginary line extends from the chain and passes through the center of the clamp teeth. The clamp should be considered another link in the chain. Depending on clamp configuration clamps may be designed to pull in one direction only or multiple directions. Adjust clamp placement as necessary during the pulling process. As pulling progresses, angles can change, which may require repositioning the clamp to ensure the part is being straightened in the intended manner. Note: Ensure clamp attachment point is clean and free contaminants to prevent clamp from slipping. Stop the pull and reattach or tighten if the clamp begins to slip -Weld-On Attachments – weld-on plates and attachments are typically used with clamps or a special adapter for making a pull. Excessive heat from welding can weaken HSS and UHSS parts. Part replacement, either completely or partially, is often required when weld-on attachments are used for structural straightening. If used to straighten an exterior cosmetic panel, part replacement may not be required. To prevent an accidental fire, be sure to remove flammable materials, such as foams, seam sealers, and adhesives from the repair area Pulling Towers -Pulling Towers – pulling towers may be used for anchoring parts of a vehicle and to makle simultaneous multiple pulls. Increasing the number of towers allows for multiple simultaneous pulls, which are useful for removing multiple types of damage conditions -Types of Pulling Towers – types of pulling towers include mobile towers, which can be removed from the bench and positioned where required around the vehicle, and attached towers which include track-mounted and pivoting. Track-mounted towers slide along a track on the outside of the rack or bench. This allows 360 degree access to the vehicle. Pivoting towers may have multiple towers that pivot at a single point beneath the rack or bench or individually, depending on its design. Knowing the capabilities and limitations of the equipment can help determine the best direction and position to load the vehicle on the repair equipment to reduce delays -Securing Towers – to prevent damage to the equipment and personal injury, pulling towers need to be properly secured before pulls are made. Mobile towers often use a wedge to secure the pulling tower once it is positioned. If this is not done, some angles can put downward force or lateral force on the tower that may damage tower pivot bearings. Mobile pulling towers have pivot points that allow the tower to be positioned in various angle configurations. Pins may be used to hold them in place -Straightening Equipment – straightening equipment is available in varying capacities. Common capacities include 5-ton and 10-ton. The capacity chosen is generally dependent on the job to be done. A stronger tower may be required depending on the amount of force needed to remove the damage. For example, a frame rail on a full-frame vehicle generally requires more force to remove damage compared to a lower rail on a unibody vehicle. Multiple towers may be used to increase force applied to one area Additional Tools -Pulling Chains – pulling chains are used to attach the pulling attachments to the pulling tower or hydraulic ram. Pulling chains are designed to withstand a specific tensile strength. For example, if using a 10-ton ram, the chain must be able to withstand 20,000 lbs or more of pulling force. Do not use tow chains as they may not be strong enough to be used for making structural pulls. Always use the chains that were provided with the equipment to ensure the tensile strength of the chain matches or exceeds the pulling capacity of the equipment -Nylon Pulling Straps – nylon pulling straps or slings may also be used in place of chains. Pulling straps: -Are available in varying lengths -Help protect the part being pulled from chain scratches -May be used in areas that are difficult to attach a clamp -Similar to chains, are designed to withstand a specific pulling strength. Pulling straps are primarily limited to lighter pulls -May not be strong enough to withstand the pulling capacity of the towers and must be carefully monitored using a pressure gauge -Safety Considerations – check chains and straps for damage or wear before and after use. Look for signs of stretching, bent links, and excessive corrosion. Replace the chain if it shows any signs of damage. Do NOT allow chains to come into contact with heat. This will reduce the strength of the chain and may cause it to break under tension -Hydraulic Rams – hydraulic rams may be used in place of or in addition to pulling towers and are available in various sizes and capacities. The size of the hydraulic ram used may vary according to the strength of the pull/push required and/or the angle required. 10-ton rams are typically used with most frame benches or racks and vector pulling. 4-ton rams are typically used for smaller work where portability and lower force is required. Either may use a manual or pneumatic pump Full-Frame/Unitized Structure Pulling Overview (3/3) Processes and Techniques Types of Pulls -Single Pulls – single pulls -Concentrate the pulling force into a small area -May be used to correct areas of direct damage -Can distort, overpull, or damage the metal -May not correct indirect damage -Work best when damage is confined to one area on the vehicle -Multiple Pulls – multiple pulls – -Spread the pulling force over a large area to minimize tearing -Allow pulling at different angles at the same time. This allows simultaneous removal of length, height, and width misalignment -Are more efficient than making one pull in one direction at one time -May be used to correct indirect damage -Note: It is important to remember that every anchoring, fixturing, or blocking point has the potential to act as a pulling point -Vector Pull – a vector pull uses a hydraulic ram to push on a chain. This can be done on a frame machine or floor system. The angle in which the ram is positioned will affect the direction of the pull. A chain is anchored at one end and the other end is attached to the pulling clamp. The hydraulic ram is placed about the midpoint of the chain. Vector pulling can be used as an additional pulling method in addition to towers and may be used as an anchor or provide a counterpull -Vector System Pulling Force – monitor the position of the hydraulic ram in relation to the chains when using vector pulling. A properly set up system can provide a great amount of pulling force. An improperly set up system can damage the equipment, vehicle, and possibly break the chain, resulting in personal injury. The angle of the corner where the ram contacts the chain should not be less than 90 degrees. An angle less than 90 degrees will result in considerable pressure being placed on the length of chain between the anchor and ram, with very little pulling power applied to the vehicle Pulling Force -Pulling Tower and Pully Chain Positioning – tower design will affect pulling capacity depending on the position of the chain on the tower. Pulling towers that wrap chins around the spines on the back of the tower will have reduced force with the chain higher on the tower and increased force lower on the tower. Pully-type towers do not chain pulling force with changes in chain height. The puller/collar lock knob should be tight to allow you to position the chain at the desired height but loosen when pulling. The collar should be loosened and lowered to the bottom position when not in use. Note: Do not twist chains, this can damage the chain and cause it to break when making pulls -Monitoring Pulling Force – pressure gauges can be used to monitor the pressure applied to the hydraulic rams and can help when pulling and stress relieving the structure. Pneumatic-powered hydraulic pumps produce a rhythmic beat, as the hydraulic pressure increases, the beat slows down. Hydraulic pumps that are powered electrically do not create the same type of sound, but you can still hear the pump sound change as pressure increases. If the structure is not moving as expected, and the hydraulic pump is slowing, re-evaluate the pulling set-up. Avoid overloading the equipment to prevent excessive wear or damage to the straightening equipment or vehicle. Note: Monitoring pressure gauges may help avoid exceeding the equipment capacity and prevent overpulling Pulling Techniques -Pulling Force – it is important to pay attention to the amount of force being used to remove damage. If a tremendous amount of force is being exerted on the vehicle and very little damage is being removed, it may be necessary to release the tension on the chains, reposition the chains and/or clamps, and make another pull from a different direction. Additional pulling points may also be required to remove all the damage -Pulling Direction – examples of pulling direction may include making a forward pull that is slightly slanted toward the direct of impact. Placing a block near bends in a part helps straighten the part and keeps it from hinging further back in the vehicle, thus creating additional damage -Basic Setups for Downward Pull – basic setups for making a downward pull may include: -Placing the chain lower on the pulling tower -Placing a pulley beneath the part to be pulled to direct the chain downward. Position the chain low on the tower when doing this to reduce excessive force on the pulley. -Placing a ram beneath the frame machine bench and looping a chain to it to push downward -Connecting a chain between the rack and the part and pulling on the center area of the chain to force the part downward -Basic Setups for Upward Pull – basic setups for making an upward pull may include placing the chain high on the pulling tower or placing a hydraulic ram under the area that needs to be raised. Vector pulls may also be used but typically require using an extension and careful positioning to be successful. When pulling or pushing a part upwards, it may be necessary to hold down in an adjacent undamaged area to prevent the vehicle from being lifted out of the clamps or damaged the anchor locations. Note: When making an upward pull on some towers, it is required to bolt the tower to the machine bench to avoid equipment damage Monitoring Pulls -Monitoring Measurements – when making pulls, monitor the readings on the measuring system. Some computerized measuring systems will read the position of parts in real time. Other systems will have to be monitored by stopping the pull at various stages and manually checking the measurements. Also, if using a fixture bench, monitor how closely the alignment points line up to the fixtures -Monitoring Effects of Pull – during straightening monitor the area being straightened and adjacent panels for tears and cracks. Monitor the anchor clamp points when pulls are made to ensure the vehicle is not moving and no damage is being done to the anchor locations. Pinchweld damage or movement at anchoring points indicates that additional anchors are necessary or too much force is being applied. Noises may be generated as the vehicle is being straightened. Be sure the noises are not because there is damage being inflicted to adjacent areas or to the anchor points. If necessary, stop the pull and reevaluate the pulling and anchoring setup-up -Varying Strengths or Thickness – the part being pulled may be a different strength or thickness than the adjacent parts that are attached to it. Additionally, portions on the same part may be made of varying thicknesses/strengths. For example, the rear portion of a front rail may be made of higher strength or thicker steel compared to the front porton. Higher stngth steel or thicker steel may resist the pulling force and can affect the straightening process similar to block. A damaged part that is being pulled may transfer the pulling forces to an adjacent area or a part that is made of lower strength steel. Note: It is also important to consider material strengths when planning the pull and determining anchoring locations -first (1.5mm (350MPa)), second (1.6mm (350MPa)), third box (2.0mm (350MPa)) Stress-Relieving -Stress-Relieving – stress-relieving helps release the internal stress caused by the damage and can be accomplished using vibration or heat. When metal is heated, it allows the compressed or tightened grain structure to relax during the straightening process. Using heat for stress-relieving should only be done if permitted by the vehicle maker. Stress-relieving is done while tension is still applied to the part. Straightening without stress-relieving may restore shape, but the structure may not stay aligned when it is returned to service -Heat Considerations – heat should only be used if permitted by the vehicle maker and when following temperature and time limits. Remove any flammable materials in the area on the vehicle. When heating a part, gradually heat the area around the damage. Keep tension applied to the steel, and allow the steel to cool naturally. Do NOT Quench with water. A sudden variation in temperature may cause changes to the metal grain structure. Temperature indicators should be used to avoid overheating the part being heated. Using several different temperature rating indicators can help manage the heating process. Note: heat should never be used for straightening a UHSS part unless it is going to be replaced -Stress-Relieving Using Vibration – stress-relieving can be done using a hammer to vibrate the metal, helping to realign the molecular structure and shape of the metal. Relieve stress while tension is applied to the structure. A hardwood block or body spoon may be used to distribute the striking force. Swing the hammer so it creates a spring-like effect off the steel. Stress-relieving should be done by striking formed areas of the part, such as corners or where there are multiple layers. Avoid striking directly on the damage, which is work hardened. This may transfer the forces to undamaged areas. Note: Avoid striking flat areas of a part directly with a hammer as this may cause additional damage -Cold Stress-Relieving Procedure – to properly stress-relieve using vibration, follow the procedure below: -1) Apply pulling tension to the part being straightened -2) Hold a block of wood or body spoon on the part -3) Strike the block or spoon with a hammer and repeat on adjacent panels. This may require backside support while hammering -4) Observe the pressure gauge on the pulling equipment (if equipped). A pulling tower with a hydraulic pressure gauge allows a technician to monitor the effectiveness of stress-relieving. The pressure will drop as stress-relieving is applied to the part. -5) Repeat the process until all damage has been removed. The panel must be returned to its original shape with dimensional accuracy -Note: In time, using the pressure gauges to monitor stress-relief will allow you to build a better understanding of the repairability limits of materials and the progress of the repair -First is before stress-relief. Second is after stress-relief -Side Damage – the straightening of side damage is limited due to the strength of the reinforcements. Side impacts can transfer collision energy to the opposite side of the vehicle. The instrument panel support beam may transfer collision energy to the opposite side if there is an impact to the A-pillar. Inspect for uneven gaps between the A-pillar trim and instrument panel trim between sides, or an improperly functioning glove box. This type of damage can be difficult to repair and usually requires extensive disassembly to access the damage. Floor crossmembers and interior braces may also transfer collision energy this way -Rear Construction – parts of the rear structure are interconnected to each other and tend to move together during a collision and during straightening. Measuring and monitoring the position of adjacent parts remains critical when straightening damage to the rear structure to ensure proper gaps for the deck lid, doors, bumper, and lights. Parts made of lower strength steel may be repairable with straightening. Note that some rear body panels and frame rails may be made of higher strength steels and have limited repair options -Rear Construction – Inner Reinforcements – inner reinforcements in the rear structure may transfer collision energy forward and upward. As the collision energy reaches HSS parts, such as the B-pillar reinforcement, weaker parts on the upper door frame may start to deform and cause a door gap issue. This type of damage may be difficult to identify and can present challenges to straighten because of limited clamp placement options. It may require adjacent panels to be removed to access the damaged inner structure -Part Inspection and Fit-Up – inspect straightened parts that are not intended to be replaced for visible damage, such as shiny, silvery splinters in the stressed area and cracks. If defects are found or excessive overpulling has occurred, the parts usually have to be replaced. Clamp marks should be repaired. Clamp marks can become a corrosion hot spot. After pulls are completed, check for proper operation of closure panels and proper fit of outer body panels Straightening Full-Frames -Frame Construction – full-frames are constructed of a thicker gauge than unibody parts. The different sections of the frame may vary in thickness and in steel strength. Frame tips are designed to collapse when impacted and should not be straightened unless allowed by the vehicle maker. Crossmembers are typically welded to the inner and outer sides of the rails and require more force to straighten because of the added stiffness. Crossmembers may also be HSS, which can also change energy transfer and complicate damage removal -Blue arrows are crush zones -Equipment Requirements for Frames – the straightening equipment must be large enough to accommodate full-frame vehicles. Full-frames typically require a higher pulling force compared to unibody vehicles. The equipment must be able to withstand the higher pulling forces required for pulling thicker gauge steel -Full-Frame Anchoring – special full-frame clamps or adapters are required when straightening full-frames to securely hold them in position. Frames may also be anchored by bolting the frame anchors to specific mounting holes in the frame. Wrapping chains around the frame for anchoring or pulling can cause permanent damage to the area where the chain contacts the frame and should only be done on areas that will be replaced or with additional reinforcing plates to avoid damage -Unitized Structure Pinchweld Clamps – when straightening the unitized structure on a full-frame vehicle, pinchweld clamps and/or body mount adapters should be used for anchoring the body when pulling. This may be in addition to anchoring clamps on the frame. Do not anchor only by the pinchwelds if the frame requires straightening. This will not provide sufficient strength, and it is likely that frame mounts and anchoring areas would be damaged if the unitized structure is clamped and pulls are made on the frame. The frame may not require anchoring if only parts of the body require straightening -Indirect Damage – there may be differences in how indirect damage shows up in other areas of the vehicle between sport utility vehicles (SUVs) and pickup trucks. On a pickup truck, the bed is separate from the front body structure. An SUV has a full unitized structure. Also, the rigidity and strength of the frame and body, as well as nature of the loss, will affect how indirect damage is transferred throughout the vehicle. This reinforces the importance of measuring the entire length of the vehicle -Considerations for Full-Frames – depending on the damage, it may be beneficial to leave the body attached to the frame when making pulls to the frame, as this may straighten indirect damage on the body. Full-frames have a tendency to have more spring-back than unitized body constructions. This may require a higher amount of overpulling than for unibody pats. It may be necessary to loosen or remove the body to prevent pulling forces from affecting an undamaged body. Stress-relieving while pulling is crucial to help ensure the frame remains at the repaired dimensions after repairs are complete -First is undamaged. Second is damaged -Diamond Condition – diamond condition is damage that occurs in the center section where one side is moved forward or rearward, causing the center section of the frame to be out of square, taking on a diamond-like appearance. The condition may be determined by crosschecking diagonal dimensions of the center section -Arrow is rail pushed rearward -Removing Diamond – diamond requires pulling one rail back to specification, while holding the opposite rail in place during the place. This requires leaving some anchoring bases loose on the damaged side to allow the center section to be pulled into alignment. Inspect body mounts and hardware as some realignment or part replacement may be necessary. Diamond may require removing body mounting bolts to permit overpulling to correct diamond. Diamond affects the rail-to-crossmember mounting locations. Monitor these locations during the straightening process. It is important to stress-relieve rail-to-crossmember mounting locations when removing diamond. Note: Some vehicles have oil- filled body mounts. These mounts can be damaged if subjected to collision and/or pulling forces -Blue arrow is pull forward. Orange circle is anchor undamaged area General Motors (BrightDrop) High Voltage Safety Systems (1/ Course 18400 00W High Voltage Systems Safety High Voltage Systems Characteristics and Safety -High Voltage Ranges – General Motors classifies voltages into three ranges: low, intermediate, and high. A color code system is used to indicate intermediate and high voltage cables. Low voltage ranges from 0 to 30 volts Direct Current (DC). Intermediate voltage ranges from 30 to 60 volts DC and have blue colored cables. High voltage is any voltage greater than 60 volts DC and have orange colored cables --Voltage Range -Direct Current -Low Voltage: 30 volts or less -Intermediate Voltage: between 30 and 60 volts -High Voltage: over 60 volts -Alternating Current -Low Voltage: 15 volts or less -Intermediate Voltage: between 15 and 30 Volts RMS -High Voltage: over 30 Volts RMS -Note: Some diesel engines may have orange-colored cables supplying power to the injectors. Diesel engines that use the piezo-type injectors use high voltage to fire the injectors. -Note: RMS stands for Root-Mean-Square, this represents the effective voltage when measuring AC voltage. The RMS voltage is lower than the peak voltage -High Voltage Labels – high voltage labels enable quick identification of potential electrical hazards. Color-coded labels identify areas where potential electrical hazards exist in high voltage systems. The labels are attached in various locations on the vehicle, including on the high voltage cables, battery, power electronics, transmission, and air conditioning compressor. The labels are color-coded to indicate the potential high voltage state: a red label indicates that high voltage is present at all time, an orange label indicates that high voltage should be present only when the system is active. -Orange High Voltage Warning Labels – the high voltage warning labels are orange, and indicate a potential shock hazard if high voltage is not properly disabled. These labels are located on all high voltage components, except the drive motor battery -Red High Voltage Danger Labels – the high voltage danger labels are red and indicate that high voltage is present at all times. These labels are located only on the drive motor battery -First Responders Label – the emergency / service personnel warning label provides general instructions to emergency personnel regarding high voltage disable procedures. The label also indicates that high voltage must be disabled prior to servicing the vehicle. The warning label is affixed at the front of the engine compartment and provides specific procedures for emergency and service personnel -Safety Preparation Steps – when working on high voltage systems, the work area must be prepared for safety before work is started -Standing Water – water may conduct electricity and provide an additional path for current flow. Always clean up any standing water in the work area before servicing high voltage electrical systems -Mark Areas – place safety cones around the vehicle and the work area to alert others that a high voltage system is being serviced. Cones are available as part of the high voltage safety kit EL-48900 -Tripping Hazards – clear the area of loose items and other tripping hazards. Electrical cords and cables should be removed, covered with a cable guard, or secured to the floor using tape -Remove Jewelry – metal jewelry, including watches, rings, and necklaces, can conduct electricity. Remove these before servicing a high voltage system -Remove Metal Objects – remove metal objects, such as mechanical pencils or tools, form your pockets because they may fall and create an arc hazard -Belt Buckles – some metal objects cannot be removed, like belt buckles. These should be covered to prevent accidental contact with high voltage Personal Protective Equipment and Safety Practices -Personal Protective Equipment – before working on any high voltage system, be sure to inspect and wear the appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) -Gloves – insulation gloves provide protection when working on live high voltage circutis -Specs on gloves in image: Salisbury. 9. ANSI/ASTM. Made in USA. D120. Class 0. Type I. Max use volt 1000v AC -Class 0 Gloves – GM requires class 0 gloves when working on hybrid and electric vehicles. Class 0 gloves are rated for protection up to 1000 Volts Alternating Current (VAC). Class 00 gloves do not provide the required protection, even though hybrid and electric vehicle batteries are below the 500 VAC rating. The hybrid battery may only be up to 360 VAC, but the alternating current to and from the electric motors may be higher, often exceeding the 500 VAC rating of class 00 gloves. Gloves with a higher class than 0 are rated for higher voltages and may be used, but the thicker rubber makes them impractical for performing tasks on hybrid and electric vehicle high voltage systems -Electrical Insulation Glove Classes. Class maximum AC voltage maximum DC voltage label color -Class -AC Voltage -DC Voltage -Label Color -00 -500 -750 -beige -0 -1,000 -1,500 -red -1 -7,500 -11,250 -white -2 -17,000 -25,500 -yellow -3 -26,500 -39,750 -green -4 -36,000 -54,000 -orange -Electrical Gloves – electrical gloves consist of two parts, the leather outer shell and the rubber inner shell. The leather outer shell provides no protection from electricity, but it does protect the rubber inner glove from being damaged by sharp objects. Gloves should be stored in the box or bag provided by the manufacturer. Direct sunlight will dry out the rubber and cause it to crack. The gloves should never be stored when folded, compressed, or inside out, as this will cause the gloves to crease and crack. Never use either part of the electrical insulation gloves for anything except when working with high voltage. Contaminating the gloves with engine oil or chemicals will degrade the rubber and reduce the insulating properties -Gloves Identification – the label on the gloves provides several important pieces of information, including the size, class, rating, and manufacturer. Class 0 gloves have a red-colored label. A beige label indicates class 00 gloves, which do not provide sufficient protection. The glove color is not an indication of the protection they provide. -Date Stamp – new gloves may be used up to 12 months from the date of manufacture, if they are removed from an unopened box. When the gloves expire, they must be recertified every 6 months. When the gloves are recertified, the date of recertification is stamped on the glove, near the label. The timeframe for using the gloves starts on the date stamped on the glove, not the date of purchase -Safety Glasses – safety glasses are required when within 15 meters (50 feet) of a hybrid or electric vehicle, either indoors or outdoors. The safety glasses must have protective side shields -Rubber Soled Shoes – rubber soled shoes provide additional electrical insulation to the ground as well as increased traction to avoid slipping while working on high voltage electrical systems -Safety Practices – in addition to preparation and PPE, there are some best practices that improve safety. -Never work alone – always make sure that someone is available to provide assistance in case of any emergency -One hand rule – when possible, work using only one hand when working on live high voltage circuits. The other hand should not be touching anything, keep it behind your back. This limits the possibility of completing a circuit/ this also prevents the most dangerous current flow – in one had, through your heat, and out the other hand -Cover Terminals – removed terminals should be covered using the EL-50209 high voltage terminal covers or electrical tape rated for 600 volts or higher High Voltage Systems Safety Tools and Disabling -Disabling High Voltage – when servicing high voltage systems on a hybrid or electric vehicle, the system should be disabled to remove the power. Always consult Service Information (SI) for a detailed procedure for disabling the vehicle -Unplug the Vehicle – the vehicle must be disconnected from all external power sources. On plug-in hybrid and electric vehicles, the charge cord must be unplugged from the vehicle. Disconnect any 12 V battery chargers from the vehicle -Shut Off the Vehicle – turn the key to the OFF position, remove the key from the ignition, and secure the key in a locked drawer. If equipped with the Passive Entry Passive Start (PEPS) systems, push the button and ensure the vehicle powers down. Move the fob away from the vehicle and secure it in a locked drawer at least 5 meters (15 feet) away from the vehicle. After removing the fob, test the vehicle and verify that the vehicle will not power up. This ensures that another fob was not left in the vehicle. Securing the key or fob ensures that other persons will not attempt to start the vehicle while the high voltage system is being serviced -Disconnect the 12V Battery – disconnect the 12V battery. The contactors for the high voltage battery require power from the 12V battery to operate. Disconnecting the battery ensures the contactors will not close while the system is being serviced. Caution: it is possible for a contactor to fail in the closed position. Do not assume that disconnecting the 12V battery removes all high voltage from the vehicle. -Remove or Open the Disconnect – remove the manual disconnect plug or open the disconnect switch. If equipped with a disconnect plug, the plug should be secured in a locked drawer to prevent anyone else from installing it while the high voltage system is being serviced. If equipped with a switch, the switch should be wire-tied open to prevent anyone from closing the switch while the high voltage system is being serviced -Wait – wait at least 5 minutes after removing/opening the disconnect. Most high voltage systems contain capacitors that may remain charged for several minutes -Test – use a meter to confirm that no high voltage is present. Confirming that no voltage is present requires using the Live-Dead-Live test. To complete this test, set the meter to DC voltage. Test the meter on the 12V battery. A reading of 12 volts indicates the meter is working properly. Test the high voltage circuits for the presence of high voltage. Generally, a reading under 3 volts is considered dead. Finally, retest the meter on the 12V battery. This confirms that the meter did not fail while testing the high voltage. Consult Service Information for instructions related to voltage readings over 3 Volts on the high voltage circuits -Multimeters – digital multimeters come in a variety of categories and voltage ratings. -Digital Multimeter – the digital multimeter (DMM) must have a minimum rating of category III and 1000 volts. Lower ratings are not sufficient to protect against arc flash from high voltage transients or spikes. The Fluke 87 and the Fluke 1587 are both rated for category III and 1000 volts -Leads - the leads should have the category and voltage ratings stamped into them. The meter system takes on the ratings of the lowest rated part. If category II leads are used, the complete system becomes category II. The plastic covers on the leads are there to prevent arc flash. Leads that are missing the plastic covers are no longer considered category III leads. The leads should be inspected for damage before every use, similar to the gloves Internal Battery Service and First Responder Guides -Internal Battery Service – some faults required opening the high voltage battery case to service. When inside the case, the high voltage battery is considered live at all times. There is no method to disable the voltage from the battery. Depowering the battery removes most of the energy from the battery, but a depowered battery still contains high voltage and remains dangerous -First Responder Guides – the first responders guide contains information for first responders on handling the vehicle. It contains information on the location of warning labels and how to safely disable the vehicle. It also shows the cut points for cutting the 12V power to the vehicle, which will remove power from the contactors and power down the high voltage system -First Responder Information – the first responders guide for all GM hybrid and electric vehicles can be found on the GM Service Technical College website and the National Fire Protection Association website. -Test results 1) High Voltage Labels – enable quick identification of potential electrical hazards -High Voltage Ranges – any voltage greater than 60 volts and have orange colored cables -First Responder Labels – provide general instructions to emergency personnel regarding high voltage disable procedures 2) which three of the following statements are the best practices to improve safety -Use only one hand when working on live high voltage circuits -Never work alone -Cover removed terminals using the EL-50209 high voltage terminal covers or electrical tape rated for 600 volts or higher 3) which two of the following statements describe the type of information in the first responder guide - the first responders guide shows the cut points for cutting the 12v power to the vehicle -the first responders guide contains information on the location of warning labels and how to safely disable the vehicle 4) what category must the DMM be rated -the DMM must be rated a category III and 1000 volts or higher 5) which three of the following statements about the first responder labels are correct -the label provides general instructions to emergency personnel regarding high voltage disable procedures -the label indicates that high voltage must be disabled prior to servicing the vehicle -the label is affixed at the front of the engine compartment and provides specific procedures for emergency and service personnel General Motors (BrightDrop) High Voltage Safety Systems (2/ Course 18420 17W High Voltage Depower Tool Usage -High Voltage Depowering – in severe crashes involving high voltage vehicles where the airbags deploy, post-crash inspections of the high voltage systems are expected, the need to depower the high voltage systems in these vehicles, however, should be infrequent. If you have any questions or concerns regarding High Voltage inspections or depowering, please contact the Technical Assistance Center -High Voltage Disabling – the high voltage disabling procedure utilizes two possible methods to disable high voltage: -Note: the high voltage disable procedure, regardless of the method, only de-energizes the high voltage circuits and components outside of the Hybrid/EV battery pack, dangerous voltage levels always exist within the Hybrid/EV battery pack -1) – scan tool method: the on-vehicle control module software, initiated by the GDS2 scan tool, disables and discharges high voltage outside of the Hybrid/EV battery pack -2) – DMM method: if the GDS2 Scan Tool Method does not complete or cannot be implemented, a DMM-based physical measurement method is performed at certain high voltage connectors - A successful GDS2 Scan Tool high Voltage Procedure will: -1) perform an analysis of the vehicle condition by verifying specific DTCs have run and passed -2) calculate the high voltage isolation resistance to the vehicle chassis -3) open the high voltage contactor relays and discharge the high voltage systems -4) latch a Service Lockout condition to prevent unintended enabling of the high voltage systems Questions Questions 1)True or false, no part of the vehicle inspection or high voltage depowering procedure is covered under the GM factory warranty -True 2) after a collision of a high voltage vehicle, what are the two most unique inspection procedures GM recommends? -Component initial and high voltage operation -3) what procedure must be done prior to performing the component initial inspection -High voltage disable procedure -4) the only way to clear the High Voltage Lockout State is to use the Clear Secured High Voltage DTC procedures using the scan tool Control Functions for which 2 modules -HPCM and HPCM 2 -5) if a high voltage depowering procedure is necessary, what two modules must be isolated from the system by removing their fuses and jumping the non-powered legs of the fuses together -HPCM2 and BECM -6) how far away from other vehicles, buildings, or combustibles does General Motors recommend a damaged high voltage vehicle be stored? -50 feet (15 meters) -7) when a vehicle is involved in a collision of sufficient intensity, what causes the high voltage contactor relays to open -Control power is removed by the HPCM2 -8) what is the voltage threshold in which a high voltage battery depowering procedure would not be necessary -285 -9) what must be installed to create a series circuit within the battery during depowering -The manual service disconnect -10) where should a damaged high voltage battery pack or section be returned to -recyclemybattery General Motors (BrightDrop) High Voltage Safety Systems (3/ Course 22048. 55V Preventing Unintended Airbag Deployment Questions -1) on many GM vehicles the roll over sensor is incorporated into the ____ -SIR module -2) when servicing the SIR module ___ -disconnect the SIR module before disconnecting the battery, it prevents voltage spikes -3) when re-installing the SIR module the negative battery cable should not be connected until ___ -after the module connector is installed -4) which of the following is not a step in the SIR disable procedure -Disconnect all electrical connectors from the SIR module -5) according to the video which of the following constitutes many of the unintended airbag deployments during service -Roof rail airbag General Motors (BrightDrop) High Voltage Safety Systems (4/ Course 18044.40W Vehicle Network Security -Vehicle Network Security – network security protects modules on the General Motors Local Area Network (GMLAN) from being controlled by unauthorized network messages. This course will provide an overview of the network components purpose and function as well as the faults associated with the network. Vehicle Network Security Overview -Types of Vehicle Interfaces – vehicle interfaces provide customers with a greater level of connectivity and convenience. They also increase the risk that harmful software could enter the infotainment system or OnStar system and potentially affect the operation of the vehicle. -Cellular – the cellular interface is integrated to the Telematics Communication Interface Control module. The cellular interface supports the OnStar system -Wifi-with the appropriate OnStar subscription, the vehicles wifi interface, if equipped, provides customers with in-vehicle access to the internet. The WiFi interface may be integrated to the Telematics Communication Interface Control Module. The interface may also be built into the radio. A WiFi interface may also be built into the HMI module, if equipped -BlueTooth – the Bluetooth interface provides features like hands-free calling using a cellular phone and may support streaming audio from a compatible digital media player. Depending on the vehicles options, the Bluetooth interface may be integrated to the Telematics Communication Interface Control Module; the Radio or the HMI module, if equipped -USB – the USB interface allows the infotainment system to read media, such as MP3 files from the USB storage devices, interface with digital media players, and support infotainment features like phone projection. The USB interface is also used in the service department to carry out infotainment software updates. The USB interface may be an input to the Radio, or to the HMI module, if equipped. Identify that the USB interfaces with the Radio or HMI module depending on vehicle equipment -Types of Isolated GMLAN Networks -an isolated GMLAN is an electrically separate section of a network that connects the components of the Infotainment and OnStar systems. An Isolated GMLAN exchanges messages with the rest of the GMLAN network via the Serial Data Gateway Module -Isolated High-Speed GMLAN – the modules in the isolated High-Speed GMLAN are highlighted. Note that the Serial Data Gateway Module contains a terminating resistor for the isolated GMLAN -Isolated Low-Speed GMLAN – the modules in the isolated Low-Speed GMLAN are highlighted -Serial Data Gateway- the Serial Data Gateway Module, sometimes called the Central Gateway Module or the First Generation Gateway Module, behaves as a “firewall”” between the GMLAN and Isolated GMLAN data buses. The Serial Data Gateway Module allows only authorized network traffic to pass from the Isolated GMLAN to the rest of the GMLAN data buses. All abnormal messages are blocked. The Serial Data Gateway Module also helps to reduce the number of modules connected to the GMLAN by managing network traffic between other networks. Question – Which GMLAN exchanges messages with the rest of the GMLAN via the Serial Data Gateway Module -Isolated GMLAN Vehicle Network Faults -First Generation Serial Data Gateway Module – the Serial Data Gateway Module can set Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTCs) if a fault prevents communication over an Isolated GMLAN. -DTC U007D – a short-to-ground on the Isolated Low-Speed GMLAN may set DTC U007D -DTC U007B - a short between the Isolated High-Speed GMLAN wires may set DTC U007B -Second Generation Serial Data Gateway Module – the K56 Serial Data Gateway Module Generation 2 is used to handle communications between multiple GMLAN buses and functions as a gateway to isolate the secure networks from the unsecured networks -Uses – the K56 Serial Data Gateway Module mitigates bus loading to support cyber security and new active/advanced safety features (if equipped). It is used as a frame-to-frame gateway for all functional messages -Communication – communication between the K56 Serial Data Gateway Module and a scan tool is done through the primary High-Speed GMLAN bus. When the K56 Serial Data Gateway Module is not communication, the scan tool cannot communicate with the vehicle. If the communication does not exist or the particular modules have not been programmed, control modules will not be able to communicate with or through the K56 Serial Data Gateway Module -Microprocessors – the K567 Serial Data Gateway Module has two microprocessors within the electronic control unit. Each microprocessor is diagnosed/programmed independently via the scan tool because the two microprocessors do not talk internally. Each of these processors is responsible for managing the traffic for specific communication buses on the vehicle. The two particular buses that are managed are high-speed and low-speed. Note: the Data Bus Diagnostic Tool will not work with vehicles equipped with the K56 Serial Data Gateway Module Generation 2 -Serial Data Gateway Module Processor 1-High Speed Microprocessor- General Motors (BrightDrop) High Voltage Safety Systems (5/ Course 10041. 14W-R2 Service Information (SI) Overview Introduction- this module covers how to find service manuals and other publications from the Service Information (SI) home page. Upon completion of this module, you should be able to identify. -SI’s purpose, accessibility, and main characteristics -Types of publications and general searching techniques -Navigational functions of icons on the home page -Service Information – SI is a comprehensive source of the latest diagnostic and repair information for most GM products. SI helps technicians to ensure that GM vehicles continue to meet safety and quality standards. SI contains service bulletins, campaign information, repair procedures, component locations, and schematics. SI also contains a feedback interface that enables technicians to communicate any concerns they may have with the system or its content -Accessing Service Information – technicians can access Service Information through Techline Connect. After logging into Techline Connect, select the SI button on the dashboard’s left-hand navigation bar to open the home page for GM Service Information -Danger Statement – it is important for technicians to be safe and take all precautions when diagnosing and servicing vehicles. The danger statement in SI provides instructions to reduce the risk of personal injury and property damage. Technicians must read and accept the danger statement to view the information in SI -Service Information Home Page – the SI home page is divided into three areas. Beginning at the top. Select each highlighted to area to learn more. -Top Area – the top area provides drop-down menus to select a specific region and language. Selecting a region from the Region drop-down menu filters the information to the selected region region. Depending on the region, multiple languages are available. The top area is like many Web browsers with features such as forward and back, refresh, and search. -Middle Area – the middle area incorporates two ways to search for vehicle-specific information. To search for a vehicle using the Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) all 17 characters are required. If the VIN is not available, search for the vehicle using the Year, Make, and Model drop-down menus -Bottom Area – the bottom area contains hyperlinks to additional information and search options. To access these options, select the icon or hyperlink. These icons may appear at the top of any page within SI and function in the same manner no matter which page the links are on -Finding Publications for a Specific Vehicle – to review publications for a specific vehicle, you would select the year, make, and model from the drop-down menus. In this example, the selections have been made for the 2022 Cadillac CT4. -Available Publications – the available publications for the 2022 Cadillac CT4 appear on the screen. To see listings in the CT4 Service Manual, select the highlighted hyperlink -Service Category Types – the next screen reveals a list of service category types from the service manual for the CT4. Select Engine/Propulsion to continue with this example -Service Categories – there are several service categories within the Engine/Propulsion service category type -Bulletin List – bulletins are grouped by the type of information they contain -Service Bulletin – service bulletins are identified by a bulletin number and a Document ID number. Highlighted above is the path followed to get to this point in SI. To return to the list of all bulletins for the vehicle, you would select the previous link in the path -Quick Links – eight hyperlinks, known as quick links, are arranged horizontally underneath the search fields. These are shortcuts to access information within SI for a particular vehicle. -Fastener Specification – the fastener specification quick link brings up a list of components or repair areas for the selected vehicle. This example shows the selection of fastener specifications for an automatic transmission, followed by the selection of the desired repair area. The path leads to a table that provides fastener information, including links to the available procedures related to each fastener -RPO Code List – selecting RPO Code List provides a list of all Regular Production Option codes that are available for the selected vehicle, along with their descriptions. Technicians may further search by RPO code or by description. This example demonstrates a search using the IOT radio RPO -Maintenance Items – the maintenance items quick link displays a list of links to maintenance information, such as fluid and lubricant recommendations, oil life system resetting, and tire rotation -Master Electrical Component List – this quick link leads to the Master Electrical Component List in table format, as shown. The table has the precise location of each component, Along with its name and code designation. Hyperlinks in the table lead to more data and graphics such as connector end views -Diagnostic Starting Point – the diagnostic starting point quick link leads to the hyperlink Diagnostic System Check – Vehicle, which offers a strategy to identify publications related to the customers concern. To identify a control module that is not communicating or has a set diagnostic trouble code (DTC), to address power mode concerns, to verify that the engine cranks and runs, and to make a diagnosis based on symptoms -Diagnostic Trouble Code List – this quick link provides a searchable list of all DTCs related to the selected vehicle -Symptom List – the symptom list quick link brings up symptoms for various automotive systems, which may be useful in the diagnostics of the selected vehicle -Control Module References – this quick link displays the Control Module References table, which contains global component codes and hyperlinks to control module and scan tool information, wiring schematics, repair instructions, and programming and setup instructions for control modules -Search Types – SI provides a way to search for all types of publications for a specific vehicle. For this example, begin the search by selecting the highlighted options from each drop-down menu. Year: 2022, Make: GMC truck, and Model: Yukon XL-4WD/ then select the highlighted next button to continue -Basic Search – the first search type, Basic Search, enables the technician to enter up to five keywords that may appear in any order in documents or document titles. To learn more about the second search type, select the search by phrase link -Search by Phrase – this search type enables the entry of a complete phrase of up to five words. The results will include documents or titles containing the exact phrase -Search Filters – the search types Basic Search and Search by Phrase provide drop-down menus and entry fields that serve as search filters, enabling the technician to refine the search results -Document or Title Search – using the drop-down highlighted here, you can choose to search within the content of all the documents for the vehicle or to limit the search to titles only -All or Any Search – match all, any, or beginning keywords using the drop-down menu highlighted here. These options are only available when using the Basic Search function -Keyword Search – enter one of more keywords into this search field. Valid characters for this search are letters, numbers, forwards slashes (/), periods, and hyphens. Another option is to select Search Help, which will provide a reminder of the search rules -New Bulletins – icons and hyperlinks on the Service Information home page provide access to search options, guides, and plentiful vehicle information. For this example, select the New Bulletins icon to go to the most recently released bulletins, campaigns, and preliminary Information. Documents that have arrived in the last week are displayed here. To view documents that have arrived for a different time interval or vehicle, you would make the appropriate selections from the highlighted drop-down menus -Finding the Next Term – the Service Information system offers a way to find the next instance of a term within the listings. The technician may enter the desired term in the search box at the top of the screen, and the system will automatically highlight all instances of that term. Selecting the up or down arrows highlights the next or previous instance of the term -Number Search – all SI bulletins, campaigns, and preliminary information have a document identification number. Instead of searching for information by vehicle type, try searching by a document number. The two types of numeric searches are Bulletin or Campaign Number search and Document ID search. Do not use any spaces or dashes when entering a Document ID number. Bulletin or Campaign numbers may be entered with or without the dashes. Select the highlighted Search button to view bulletin number 22-NA-022 -Year Range + Platform + Keyword Search – selected highlighted blue hyperlinlk -Unit Repair -the unit repair icon links to available unit repair manuals, specialty publications, and supplemental transmission technical guides -Unit Repair Categories – the unit repair content is organized like service manual content. To navigate, you would select each appropriate hyperlink until you find the desired document. In this example, we will locate the specifications for the 4T65-E Automatic Transaxle. -Unit Repair Category Type – this page contains hyperlinks to additional divisions in the Unit Repair Manual -List of Available Transmission – the next page provides a list of transmissions available in the 2006 model year. -Categories of Information – several categories of information are available for the 4T65-E automatic transaxle -Transmission General Specifications – view the information contained in the Transmission General Specifications document -User Guide – the User Guide icon provides hyperlinks to information on GM diagnostic tools, applications, and service procedures -User Guide – the user guide icon provides hyperlinks to information on GM diagnostic tools, applications, and service procedures. -Feedback – the feedback option enables you to communicate any questions, issues, or concerns experienced while using Service Information -Feedback Form – the Service Information Feedback Form provides an opportunity to describe problems that you may encounter and make suggestions for improvements. When reporting a problem, specific information is required. Describe exactly what happened, when the problem occurred, and whether the problem can be reproduced -Help – Service Information provides a link from the home page to various topics that help you to navigate and use the system. The subsequent page contains a list of hyperlinks that lead to the Help topics. To return to this list of topics from anywhere in SI, you would select the Help icon in the upper right corner of the screen Question : 1)Automotive technicians can access GM Service Information (SI) through which one of the following systems Techline Connect 2)Which one of the following items is NOT found within the Service Information (SI) Scan tool software 3) Drag the name of each Service Information quick link on the right to its correct description on the left Leads to the hyperlink Diagnostic System Check – vehicle, which offers a strategy to resolve the customers concern -&gt; diagnostic starting point Displays a table containing component details and hyperlinks that go to graphics, such as connector end views -&gt; master electrical component list Lists symptoms for various automotive systems, which may be useful in the diagnostics of the selected vehicle -&gt; symptom list Provides a path to scan tool information, schematics, repair instructions, and setup instructions for control modules -&gt; control module references Offers a list of vehicle components to choose from, leading to illustrations and repair procedures -&gt; fastener specifications 4) drag each label on the left to the correct hyperlink icon from the Service Information home page 1) new bulletins 2) number search 3)unit repair 4)feedback 5)help -Navigation Icons – service manual documents typically include tables, images, and electrical wiring schematics. After accessing a service manual, you will find wiring schematics under the Schematic and Routing Diagrams hyperlink. -Location Icon – the Location (LOC) icon links to the Master Electrical Component List containg the global component code, name, and location of each electrical component for the selected vehicle. The list also contains hyperlinks to locator views and connector end view for each component -Description Icon – the description (DESC) icon opens the associated Description and Operation document -Control Module References Icon – the control module references icon brings up a table containing hyperlinks to scan tool information, associated system schematics, repair instructions, and programming and setup instructions -Scalable Vector Graphics Viewer – SI uses an SVG viewer, which is an enhanced graphics viewer for all graphics, images, and wiring schematics. The SVG viewer features viewing tools such as hotspots, links, and larger illustrations. It is available for viewing components, harness routing diagrams, and other electrical sections, as well as viewing graphics on a tablet or smartphone. Each graphic and image in SI has a magnifying glass. -SVG Viewer Toolbar -the SVG viewer toolbar enables users to enlarge or rotate a graphic, zoom in or out, fit the image to the height or width of the window, print the graphic, and perform other functions. Edited graphics can be printed or saved to a desktop. When hovering over a toolbar icon on a personal computer, a tool tip and corresponding message appear in the browser status bar indicating the icons functionality. -Hyperlink Navigation – hyperlink navigation mode enables the detection of hotspots within the displayed image when the cursor moves over a hotspot. If the SVG viewer detects, the object is highlighted, along with either a screen tip or a link, depending upon the hotspots attribute. -Magnify Area – magnify area mode replaces the cursor with a movable magnifying glass rectangle. A 50% zoomed in view of the displayed image appears around the current cursor position. A partially enlarged view of the displayed image appears without having to change the zoom factor -Interactive Zoom – this mode enables you to zoom in on a rectangular area that you select. To select an area, you would move the cursor to a corner of the intended area, press and hold the left mouse button, drag the cursor to the opposite corner of the intended area, and then release the mouse button. An enlarged display of the selected area will fit into the current view window, while keeping the aspect ratio of the image -Pan – in pan mode, the image can be shifted within the view window. Shift the currently visible part of the image by moving the mouse to the intended original position, press the left mouse button down, and drag the cursor to the intended target position. The shifted view will be the new current view once the mouse button is released. This feature is only available when the image is zoomed into by at least 10% Etc etc more of the bar icons. Question 1) Which three of the following statements about viewing and editing schematics are TRUE Technicians can view schematics and other graphics within many service manual documents Red liner objects are visual additions to a schematic Every electrical schematic contains information and navigation icons 2) which three of the following are red liner objects Highlight Ellipse Text Test Questions 1)GM Service Information (SI) is available to everyone through the internet False 2)Which two statements about Service Information (SI) are TRUE SI Contains service bulletins, campaign information, repair procedures, component locations, and schematics SI Provides various ways to search for publications, tables and schematics 3)Which one of the following statements describe a valid characteristic of Service Information (SI) Icons on the home page have the same functions no matter where the user finds them 4) drag each icon Binoculars House Newspaper Mail 5) drag each icon Wrench Newspaper Question mark Magnifying glass 6)which three statements related to searching for information about a specific vehicle in Service Information (SI) are TRUE If the vin is not available – etc Choosing a vehicle service manual – etc One way to begin a search – etc 7) Number search Search by phrase Search filter Basic filter 8) Desc Arrow Loc Car arrow wrench 9) 1 10) Selecting A hand icon Red liner The tool 18430. 30W Battery Electric Vehicle, Introduction Heating and Cooling System Operation and Damage Analysis (1/2) Cooling System Operation Cooling System Overview -Cooling Systems – cooling systems help maintain proper engine operating temperatures. Heat generated by the engine is transferred to coolant, which then is circulated through the cooling system, reducing the temperature. This transfer of heat is accomplished by: -Conduction -Convection -Radiation -Note: If one of these methods is not operating efficiently, the other methods will be overloaded as they attempt to provide proper cooling. The cooling system is often damaged during a front end collision, and making a thorough inspection of all cooling system parts is necessary. -Liquid-Cooled Engine Systems – liquid-cooled systems comprise a large segment of cooling systems used in modern vehicles -System Function – liquid-cooled systems utilize a constant flow of coolant through the cooling system. Liquid (coolant) is moved through the cooling system by a water pumper; however, heat is removed from the coolant by the radiator and heater core. In a liquid-cooled system, the temperature of the system is controlled by a thermostat -System Inspection – when inspecting liquid-cooled systems, watch the surge tank for coolant flow. Also, feel the radiator hoses to monitor water flow, and monitor coolant temperature with a non-contact thermometer. Another system to be aware of is an air-cooled system. Air-cooled systems are cooled by a fan forcing air through the cooling fins and require unrestricted airflow for proper cooling. These systems are typically a thing of the past, so most repair facilities will not see air-cooled systems except during a restoration project. Note: When inspecting for coolant flow, be mindful that some vehicles pressurize very quickly. Radiator -There are numerous parts that comprise a radiator assembly -Drain Valve – radiator drains may be made of plastic or metal, and are typically located low on the side or bottom of the tank. The drain valve, also referred to as a petcock or plug, may be a threaded design requiring multiple turns to open, or may only require a partial rotation to open. A drain valve turned in the wrong direction, or too much, can cause permanent damage. Be sure not to use impact tools on drain valves. -Gaskets – gaskets provide a seal between the side tank and radiator core -Radiator Core – the radiator core is constructed of small metal fins that are mounted with tubes that flow horizontally or vertically. The fins conduct the heat from the tubes and transfer it to the air flowing through the radiator. The cores must be in good working condition to efficiently remove heat from the coolant. If the cores are bent or plugged, they will not function properly. -Transmission Oil Cooler – depending on the system, one or both side tanks may house a transmission oil cooler. The transmission oil cooler exchanges heat with the coolant in the radiator -Side Tanks – one side tank will be where the hot coolant flows in and then is distributed to the radiator cores. The reduced temperature coolant flows back into the system through the other side tank -Draining Procedures – when draining a cooling system, be sure that the engine is turned off. Water pump damage and engine part failure will occur if the engine is left running. Remove the radiator cap to avoid creating a vacuum in the system, and do not work on a cooling system that is under pressure. Be sure to inspect the coolant as it drains. Watch for sediment, metal flakes, and other material. If present, the system will more than likely need to be flushed before being refilled. Note: Always reference vehicle maker service procedures to identify correct repair procedures, precautions, and mandatory repairs before beginning repairs on any cooling system -Radiator Damage Analysis – there are several situations to consider when inspecting a radiator for various types of damage -Blockage and Bent Radiator Fins – blockages in a radiator can be caused by debris flowing through the cooling system, corroded radiator metal, and chemical breakdown of the coolant. Bent or missing radiator fins can be caused by gravel, birds, and large bugs, and will reduce airflow and increase the operating temperature. The radiator fins may be straightened using a fin comb. Radiator fin spacing can vary, so it is important to select the proper comb spacing -Radiator Tank Leaks – as a radiator ages, it may develop leaks. For example, leaks may develop on some radiators between the core and the tanks due to the brass composition and the soldered joint corroding. Coolant leaks may also occur where a plastic tank attaches to the core, as aging can cause the gasket to deteriorate -Monitoring Cooling System Operation – after a repair has been completed to the cooling system, it is important to verify the operating condition of the system for quality control purposes. An engine can overheat due to: -Plugged radiators -A damaged water pump -Obstructions in the coolant flow -A damaged head gasket -Air in the system -Note: A non-contact thermometer can be used to monitor cooling system temperature -Pressure Testing – cooling systems must be pressure tested for leaks and to ensure that pressure is maintained. Pressure tests are used to pressurize the system to verify that proper pressure is maintained and to identify any leaks in the system. When pressure testing a cooling system, visually inspect for leaks near the hose clamps and part joints, and heater box, both inside and outside the vehicle. It may be beneficial to leave the system pressurized for about one hour to watch for a pressure drop. Note: Do not over-pressurize the cooling system or the components may be damaged -Inspection Considerations – when pressure testing the cooling system and checking for internal engine cooling system problems, note that a failing head gasket or intake gasket can allow coolant out of the cooling system and into the engine. A damaged head gasket can also force coolant out of the system as a result of engine compression being forced into the cooling system. Note: Leaking head or intake gaskets allowing coolant to leak into the engine may result in the engine oil having a foamy or milky appearance -Radiator Caps – radiator caps perform many critical functions in a cooling system, such as regulating system pressure and keeping the system sealed from air and other contaminants. Radiator caps also hold the system under pressure to increase the boiling point of the coolant and to allow coolant flow from the coolant system into the overflow tank. Faulty radiator caps can cause many cooling system problems. Because of this, radiator caps should be pressure tested. Pressure testing helps identify the proper boil-over protection, and locates possible cooling system failure areas -Hose Clamps – the two types of hose clamps commonly used for radiator and heater hoses are spring steel and screw band. A spring hose clamp is made of spring steel with barbs on each end. Squeezing the ends opens and expands the clamp. Special hose clamp pliers should be used to remove or install round wire-type clamps. The pliers have a deep groove that will keep the clamp from slipping out of the jaw. Screw clamps are a galvanized or stainless steel band that a screw thread pattern has been cut or pressed into. One end of the band contains a captive screw. When the screw is turned, it pulls the threads of the band, causing the band to tighten. Cooling Fans -Types of Cooling Fans – cooling systems utilize two types of cooling fangs, electric and mechanical. -Electric Fans – vehicle makers may utilize one or multiple electric cooling fans on a vehicle. Electric cooling fans can be either a single fan or side-by-side fan, and utilize temperature sensors to determine when the fans need to be engaged to assist the cooling systems. The electric cooling fan can either push or pull air into the system. A normal cooling fan will run at a constant speed and direct air from the front of the vehicle through the radiator. If there is any rewiring required, be sure to get the positive and negative wires on the correct terminals of the fan. Wiring backwards will cause the fan to rotate backwards, not cooling the engine. Note: Most electric fans can start running at any time with no warning when the ignition is in the run position. However, some electric fans may start running even when the vehicle Is off. -Mechanical Fans – mechanical belt-driven fans pull air into the system and are operated by a belt that drives the fan. Mechanical fans may also use a clutch that is engaged by a thermostat, and may also utilize an electric fan to assist with cooling. Vehicle makers are moving away from mechanical belt-driven fans toward electric cooling fans to increase fuel economy and efficiency. Clutch fans are typically controlled by a thermostat. The thermostat-controlled clutch uses a bimetal coil in front to sense temperature. Heat expands the bimetal coil, which opens an internal valve that reduces clutch slippage. This in turn alters the speed of the fan. -Mechanical Cooling Fan Inspection – when inspecting a mechanical cooling fan, look for signs of oil leakage, as well as blade damage. Check the service manual for engage and disengage temperatures. Pay attention to customer complaints. A customer complaint of no heat in a vehicle may be caused by a fan clutch that is not disengaging. Inadequate cooling can be examined by spinning the fan by hand when the engine is cold. If the fan spins freely more than five times, the clutch assembly is worn out and needs replacement. Note: When inspecting a clutch-driven fan, there are multiple items that need inspection. Clutch assemblies are fluid-filled. If there are signs of leakage, the clutch should be replaced -Fan Shroud Inspection – fan shrouds may have cracks, chips, or other minor damage that may be repaired. Removing a fan shroud may give the appearance of freed airflow, but actually it reduces the directed airflow and requires the radiator to work harder to cool. Airflow under the hood helps cool the engine, coolant hoses, and radiator Cooling, Surge, and Overflow Tanks -Coolant Flow Through a Surge Tank – cooling systems may use a surge or overflow tank. Depending upon the vehicle maker, these tanks may also be called expansion or de-gas tanks. This tank: -Provides a space for coolant expansion when it gets hot -Separates air from the coolant -Is under pressure when the vehicle is running and the engine is at temperature -Has a cap that functions like a radiator cap -Is used to hold extra coolant -Should never be filled beyond the fill line -Surge Tank Inspection – inspect surge tanks for proper sealing caps, visible damage, and correct fluid levels. There are no recommended repairs to a cap or surge tank due to the high amount of tank pressure and heat. Do not open surge tanks until the system has cooled. This allows the system to depressurize, preventing hot coolant from spraying out of the tank -Overflow Tank Operation and Inspection – overflow tanks also play a pivotal role in proper cooling system operation. However, their function within the system differs greatly from surge tanks, as well as the precautions that must be taken when working with them -Coolant Flow in an Overflow System – overflow tanks allow coolant to be added or removed without opening the system. Overflow tanks are not under pressure, nor are they subject to high coolant temperatures -Overflow Tank Inspection – when inspecting overflow tanks, look for: -Proper sealing, as the opening on top of the tank must be sealed -Proper fluid level, since fluid levels will change depending on the temperature of the engine -Sediment, as overflow bottles can collect sediment due to limited coolant flow and movement -Note: Also pay attention to visible damage. If damaged, plastic repairs may be performed on items such as overflow coolant bottles, because the tank is not under pressure or the coolant is not at a high temperature Coolant System Components and Flow -Water Pump Types and Considerations – water pumps circulate coolant through the engine and cooling system. Water pumps can be driven by belts, electric motors, and gears. Water pumps that are used for primary cooling are generally mechanically driven. Auxiliary or secondary water pumps are generally electrically powered. The three different types of water pumps include: -Centrifugal -Electric -Gear-driven or direct-drive -Centrifugal Water Pumps – centrifugal flow water pumps draw coolant into the center of the pump and push the coolant out to the sides. When inspecting water pumps for damage or leakage, always inspect the weep hole -Electric Water Pumps – electric water pumps are typically used for auxiliary cooling purposes and to aid in increasing the volume of coolant through a cooling system -Gear-Driven Water Pumps – gear-driven, or direct-drive, water pumps eliminate the chance of belt slippage and poor water pump performance. Every time the engine moves, the water pump moves. When servicing a water pump, always reference vehicle maker service information to identify service procedures, precautions, and requirements. Note: When removing the original gasket material, use caution to not remove metal or gouge the sealing surfaces as this could result in leaks -Weep Hole – the weep hole on a water pump allows coolant to leak when internal seals or bearings are beginning to fail, and must be inspected. The leaking means that the water pump needs to be replaced. If it is not replaced, the impeller can grind into the engine block and cause improper clearance problems -Engine Block and Coolant Flow – coolant flowing through engine water jackets in an engine absorb heat caused by combustion and friction. These water jackets can become plugged due to coolant additive failure and debris. Also, some engines have cylinders that are held in place by friction rings. If the improper coolant is used, aluminum engine blocks may erode, causing a noise at cold startup that sounds similar to a main bearing failure. -Belt Types – there are three common belt types that are used in cooling systems -Serpentine Belts – serpentine belts are used as a primary drive belt on many late model vehicles. This type of belt is two to three times wider than V-belts, has lateral groves to hold it on the pulleys, and holds up well to the elements -V-Belts – v-belts are most commonly used on early model vehicles. These belts have a profile shaped like a “V”, and are used to run one or two accessories. V-belts are thin and have no lateral grooves running the length of the belt -Timing Belts – timing belts can be rounded or square, and have cogs that run perpendicular to the belt length. Timing belts have two different tooth styles that cannot be interchanged when servicing the timing belt. If the wrong timing belt is used on the wrong pulley, the belt will most likely jump off the timing sprocket -Belt Inspection – when inspecting belts, make sure the belt tensioners are operating properly. Also, check for: -Lateral cracks -Cracks that extend to nylon cords -Fraying of the belt -Pieces missing from the belt Heating and Cooling System Operation and Damage Analysis (2/2) Auxiliary Coolers, Temperature Controls, Hoses, and Coolant Oil Coolers -Water-Cooled Engine Oil Coolers – high-performance engines may run oil through a cooler to lower temperatures and enhance its lubricating ability. Additionally, engine coolant may be circulated through an oil filter adapter plate to cool the oil. Most engines are designed to operate without an oil cooler. However, a vehicles engine will operate properly with an air-cooled oil cooler installed, providing there is no loss in oil pressure or flow. Using an engine oil cooler will not permit longer change intervals, but proper oil maintenance will help the oil provide better protection and help keep the operating oil pressure up -Water-Cooled Transmission Oil Coolers – when working with transmission oil coolers, the radiator tank cooler must never be by-passed. This will cause the fluid to be too thick in cold water. Transmission fluid must be directed through the radiator tank to warm the fluid, as this allows for proper lubrication and fluid flow. In warm weather or harsh driving conditions, use of an external auxiliary cooler may be necessary to cool the transmission fluid properly. Damaged transmission oil coolers can cause cross-contamination between various engine parts and fluids and must be replaced. Because of this, do not drive any vehicle that has a damaged cooler -Power Steering Fluid Coolers – some vehicle makers utilize an auxiliary power steering cooler to prolong pump life, and to keep the power steering fluid temperature cool. Typically, power steering coolers are not repaired and are replaced when damaged Thermostats and Electrical Sensors -Thermostats – a thermostat is a self-contained modulating valve that controls the flow of coolant. It is controlled by a temperature-sensitive spring, which opens and closes the thermostat as the engine temperature changes. Thermostat housings can be made from: -Aluminum -Steel -Plastic/composite -Thermostat Locations – thermostats may be located at the inlet and outlet side of the engine block. Locating the thermostat at the inlet side of the engine block helps ensure that it Is immersed in coolant and does not have an air lock. Typically, the outlet side of the engine block is the most common thermostat location and the most accessible. Thermostats may also be in the following locations: -Integrated into the water pump housing -On top of the motor on the intake or the head -In the lower radiator hose -In the upper radiator hose -Coolant Sensors – coolant sensor monitor engine coolant level and temperature level, and some sensors are designed to monitor both. Coolant level sensors are located in the coolant tank, and typically illuminate a malfunction indicator lamp (MIL) on the instrument panel when coolant is low. Coolant level sensors do not send vital information to the engine controller. Coolant temperature sensors monitor coolant temperature, sending a reading to the instrument gauge, and to the vehicle computer to turn the cooling fan on and off. Sensors can malfunction and cause engine problems. For example, malfunctioning sensors can give false readings to the computer, which will cause the computer to try and compensate when not needed. Sensors with any amount of leaking must be replaced. Note: When replacing a coolant sensor, drain the cooling system before removing the system. Heater Core and Hoses -Heater System Parts – the three main parts that make up a heater system include the heater cover, heater valves, and coolant lines. -Heater Core – a heater core is typically made up of aluminum or brass, and is built similar to a radiator. The heater core operates by hot coolant entering one side of the core and passing through various water tube passages. To determine if there is a heater core leak, check for coolant. -Leaking out of the A/C drain -Dripping on the interior floor -Heater Valves – heater valves are operated by a cable, vacuum, or electronically and prevent hot coolant from entering the heater core or the vehicle. When a heater valve is utilized in a cooling system, coolant flows from the output side of the water pump, through the coolant lines, to the heater shutoff valve, through the heater core, and back to the engine -Hose and Coolant Line Types – hoses and lines are designed to carry hot fluids without losing their integrity. Typically, these hoses are described as being rubber or rigid. Rubber hoses are flexible and easier to route within the system. Rigid hoses and lines can be made from aluminum, steel, or plastic, and are designed to be routed without risk of pinching and limiting coolant flow. Steel and aluminum lines provide long-lasting coolant passages, and they should be monitored for corrosion or damage. These lines will hold up better than plastic lines -Hose Inspection and Replacement – rubber hoses should be soft and pliable. When the system is cold, the hoses should compress easily when squeezed. Replace rubber hoses if they are: -Bulging -Oil-soaked -Hardened -Weather-checked -Worn -Note: To inspect for leaks, pressurize the system with a pressure tester and monitor any fluid leakage. Coolant leaks can also be located with the use of fluorescent dyes that show up under a black light. This will determine the location of slow, intermittent leaks -Top left is swollen. Top right is hard. Bottom left is chafed. Bottom right is soft. Engine Coolant and Fluid Refilling -Overview – as vehicle engines have continued to evolve and become more complex, so has the need to ensure these engines maintain proper temperature and operation. Therefore, it is important to understand the role of coolant in modern cooling systems, and how different coolant types and properties contribute not only to the cooling process, but to condition of the vehicle and its parts as well -Coolant – be sure not to exceed the rated life of engine coolant, since the additives can physically fail and cause engine trouble. When replacing coolant: -Never use just water, except to flush the system -Replace per the vehicles makers recommendation -Flush the system if the coolant is contaminated -Note: Coolant colors may look the same, but each has distinct differences. For this reason, it is not advisable to mix coolants. When replacing/recycling coolant, be sure to store the used product in a container that is separate from waste oils. Do not mix waters and oils together. Many recyclers will not process cross-contaminated products -Coolant Testers – the two types of coolant testers include refractive testers and specific gravity testers. A refractive tester works by placing a small amount of coolant on a prism sight glass and holding the tool up to the light. The strength of the coolant can be seen on a graduated scale. A specific gravity tester measures the coolant strength by drawing coolant into a tube. There are six balls of different weight, or buoyancy, that will float depending on the mixture strength -Types of Coolant – there are several types of engine coolant that exist for different usage -Ethylene Glycol – ethylene glycol is green and has specific corrosion and rust inhibitors. This coolant is most commonly used to replace non-OAT factory coolant -Propylene Glycol – propylene glycol is green. It is not used by OEMs in their factory vehicles. However, it is considered less toxic than conventional ethylene glycol coolant, and is, therefore, safer for pets, people and wildlife -Conventional and Hybrid American Coolant – conventional American coolant is green or gold and contains silicates (sand) that act as an abrasive and corrosion inhibitor. This coolant type also protects aluminum, although its protective properties deplete relatively quickly. Hybrid American coolant may be green or orange and is an organic acid blend. Similar to conventional American coolant, this type also contains a moderate amount of silicates -Organic Acid Technology (OAT) – organic acid technology may be an orange or pink color and is a blend of two or more organic acids. This coolant type has slow acting, long life corrosion inhibitors, but does not contain silicates or phosphates. Organic acid technology is contained in products such as Havoline DEX-COOL, Prestone, and Peak -Conventional/Hybrid European and Japanese Coolant – conventional European coolant may be blue or yellow in color. This coolant has very few silicates and does not contain any phosphates. However, it does have one organic acid to help provide corrosion protection. Hybrid European coolant may be blue or green in color and is similar to conventional European coolant. This coolant has large amounts of organic acids, and is designed to have silicates provide the primary protection to the aluminum engine parts as the organic acids protect for the long term. Conventional Japanese coolant may be green or red in color and does not contain silicates. However, this coolant has a large amount of corrosion inhibitors (phosphates) and a small amount of one or two types of organic acids -Mixing Ratios – a proper mixture between coolant and water ensures cooling protection in all types of weather. A coolant mixture that is too rich or weak will not protect properly -Blue at top is boiling points. Left is temperature. Bottom is percent of coolant -Freeze and Boil-Over Protection – in weather below 32 degrees Fahrenheit, 100% water should not be used in a cooling system. If 100% water is used in a cooling system, it should be drained and replaced with a coolant/water mix to avoid damage. The mix ratio that provides the best coolant protection is 65% coolant and 35% water. This lowers the freezing point of the coolant mixture down to -60 degrees Fahrenheit. Coolant in its pure form has a freezing point of -6 degrees Fahrenheit. Water has a lower boiling point than coolant. Water has a boiling point of 212 degrees Fahrenheit. Coolant has a boiling point of 320 degrees Fahrenheit. When mixed properly (65% coolant/35% water), a coolant mixture has a boiling point of about 245 degrees Fahrenheit. -Blue is freezing point of 100% coolant. Left is temperature. Bottom is percent of coolant -Refilling and Bleeding a System – when refilling a cooling system, always reference vehicle maker service information to identify recommended procedures, precautions, and service requirements. An example of a common filling procedure includes always mixing coolant outside the engine, turning the engine OFF, and opening any bleeder valves. Bleeder valves may be located in the: -Thermostat housing -Upper radiator hose -Highest point of the engine -Note: The bleeder valve is left open while filling the system with coolant. This allows the air trapped inside to escape. Close the bleeder valve when coolant begins to come out of the bleeder valve High Voltage Awareness (T0103E-US.TTD) T0103E-US.TTD-Pre Test What action should you take if you survive a serious electric shock? Immediately seek medical assistance, even if you feel OK Accidents are usually caused by? All of these answers are correct (being tired, not being careful, taking short cuts) What is the purpose of the padlock when de-energizing a high-voltage system? Provides a high-current discharge path for the residual high-voltage – X wrong In Mercedes-Benz vehicle, what color is used for High Voltage cables? Orange Which statement best represents the result of a serious electric shock? Heart fibrillation, unconsciousness and breathing arrest Two technicians are discussion voltage and current in an electric-drive vehicle. Technician A states that a voltage of 400 Volts at a current of 150 Amps is 60 kilowatts of power. Technician B states that 150 Amps can be carried by wires comparable to those used with a conventional pinion starter. Which technician is correct? Technician A only – X wrong Your colleague has disconnected the HV system in a vehicle. How can you be certain of this? A multimeter test of the HV battery – X wrong After completing the High Voltage awareness course, what is the highest level of work you are now qualified to perform? XENTRY-Based HV battery disconnection – X wrong What is the first rule to follow when working on a high voltage system? All of these rules are correct (short circuit the power supply, ensure all power supply components are switched ON, de-energize the high voltage system) – X wrong Why do Hybrid and Electric vehicles use High Voltage in their drive system? High voltage allows for a lower current to deliver the same amount of energy As a technician, you wish to be able to disable the High Voltage system in a Hybrid vehicle. What action should you take? Disconnect the plug for the High-Voltage battery - X wrong How can you recognize a High Voltage vehicle with certainty? From the presence of High Voltage components on the XENTRY Quick Test If power cannot be switched off and current is still flowing through the victim’s body, you should? Remove the electricity with a non-conductive pole or stick What is the purpose of the High-Voltage Interlock (HVIL) circuit? It immediately signals the system to cut off High Voltage if any connector is disconnected A good way to prevent accidents is? Following safety guidelines, along with good common sense T0103E-US.TTD-Lesson 1 -The present e-training course is part of the training on high-voltage on-board electrical systems in motor vehicles. Without knowledge of the content of this e-training course you are excluded from many operations on series production vehicles with intrinsically safe high-voltage on-board electrical systems. -Five Chapters: T0103E-US.TTD-Lesson 2 T0103E-US.TTD-Lesson T0103E-US.TTD-Post Test What first aid measures should you take after someone has survived an electrical shock? All of these first aid measures, and more, should be taken (Make an emergency call for rescue services, observe the victim carefully, keep them conscious and talking, attend to any injures, keep the victim warm and comfortable How can you recognize a High Voltage vehicle with certainty? From the presence of High Voltage components on the XENTRY Quick Test. Your colleague has disconnected the HV system in a vehicle. How can you be certain of this? The vehicle cannot be started – X wrong What action should you take if you survive a serious electric shock? Immediately seek medical assistance, even if you feel OK. After completing this High Voltage awareness course, what is the highest level of work you are now qualified to perform? Manual HV battery disconnection – X wrong Why do Hybrid and Electric vehicles use High Voltage in their drive system? High voltage allows for a lower current to deliver the same amount of energy A good way to prevent accidents is? Following safety guidelines, along with good common sense Which statement best represents the result of a serious electric shock? Heart fibrillation, unconsciousness and breathing arrest In Mercedes-Benz vehicles, what color is used for High Voltage cables? Orange Who is responsible for your safety when working on high voltage systems? Yourself After removing the victim from the current source you should? Administer First Aid if appropriate What is the first rule to follow when working on a high voltage system? All of these rules are correct (ensure all power supply components are switched ON, de-energize the high voltage system, short circuit the power supply) – X wrong What is meant by a “High-Voltage intrinsically safe vehicle”? All of these answers are correct (All high-voltage lines are insulated and shielded, High-voltage components have fully-enclosed housings, Connectors with recessed contacts are used) If power cannot be switched off and current is still flowing through the victims body, you should? Remove the electricity with a non-conductive pole or stick Two technicians are discussion voltage and current in an electric-drive vehicle. Technician A states that a voltage of 400 volts at a current of 150 amps is 60 kilowatts of power. Technician B states that 150 amps can be carried by wires comparable to those used with a conventional pinion starter. Which technician is correct? Both technician A and B Introduction to Electric Vehicle (EV) Service Considerations Introduction to Electric Vehicle Service Considerations -Introduction – this course takes a generic approach that covers a variety of topics and will introduce the student to EV repair concepts. This course is not intended to replace the vehicle-maker procedures that must be used for all service operations. Collision repair facilities should always reference the documented procedures for the specific make, model, and year of the vehicle being worked on to ensure a complete, safe, quality repair. Always make sure that you are wearing the proper personal protective equipment (PPE) for the work being performed. -EV-Certified Technician – vehicle makers require that before an EV can be serviced, it must be made safe. That responsibility is entrusted to the EV-certified technician. The technical demand from EVs has led to a new technician training, certification requirement. In most cases, vehicle makers require that the diagnosis and replacement of the high-voltage system parts be performed in a service center that has qualified and certified service technicians. There may be strict regulatory requirements in some regions and countries for EV-service technicians -EV-Certified Technician Education – electric-vehicle technicians are increasingly required to have formal training because of the rapidly growing sophistication and safety aspects of EV technology. There are numerous EV certification programs that are typically required. The training for these programs may start with some vocational school or community college. These training programs can last from a few weeks of on-the-job training to a 2-year associate degree. A technician progresses through distinct levels of certifications. Such as: -How to safely work around EVs -Basic maintenance, non-HV related -HV System power-down and -up -HV system repair and replacement -Working on live systems -Vehicle-Maker Training Programs- -Electric vehicles use new and unique technologies, so technicians generally are trained to work on a particular type of vehicle. Vehicle makers typically require this specialized training to provide certification on a particular vehicle type. These courses may train the technician in: -Electrical principles and HV safety measures -Personal protection and safety equipment -System description and operation -Safely disabling the HV system -Special service tools to test and make effective diagnosis and repair on select EV system parts -In most cases, an EV technician needs a combination of online and live formal vehicle-maker training -Designated HV Repair and Service Area – collision repair facilities may have a separate, designated EV repair area. This area may even be a separate building for EV service and repairs. There are specific parameters for a safe EV repair area. A safety zone around the vehicle, using cones, plastic chains, safety signs, specific safety tools, and equipment are used. Its important to note that across different EV vehicle makers, they all have different levels of what repairs a certified-EV technician is allowed to perform. Some vehicle makers require the vehicles HV system be disabled at the dealership -HV System Power-Down – -Depending on the work being performed, the HV system may need to be powered down. All vehicle makers have a specific shutdown procedure. These steps may include the following: -Pre-scan and record and DTCs in all systems -Ensure the vehicle power switch is OFF -Secure the key the required distance from the vehicle -Disconnect the 12-volt battery negative terminal -Ensure you are wearing proper PPE -Remove and secure the service plug to prevent it from being replaced by mistake -Validate that the HV power-down is complete on the information display or through a diagnostic scan tool -Some vehicles may only have a low-voltage disconnect solution -HV Battey Removal – HV batteries are large and heavy. To safely remove, they require specialized tools and equipment to support the battery evenly. The specific equipment needed is identified in the service information. The type of connection between the battery and the vehicle is important to consider when removing and installing. These can be either a fixed- or flexible-type connection for the HV power, cooling lines, and low-voltage data connectors. Fixed connectors require extreme care during service to avoid damage -HV Battery Removal Requirements – Typical requirements for HV battery removal include: -Raising the vehicle on a twin-post lift using the proper lift points -Positioning lift pads so the battery has clearance upon removal -Using a scissor-lift platform or a mobile-battery-table fixture -Using alignment dowels or rods -Confirming that no HV is present -Disconnecting external connections -Following a specific bolt removal sequence -Lowering the battery from the vehicle or raising the vehicle away from the battery -Installing protective connector covers or dummy plugs -HV Battery Storage – store the battery on the mobile table fixture. The fixture is adjusted specifically to the battery, vehicle, and hoist relationship when removing it. This will help with alignment when installing. Store in a clean, climate-controlled area to prevent dust, overspray, or other contamination. Ensure that all protective moisture barriers are not damaged -HV Battery Installation – Depending on the types of battery connections, there are specific requirements for installation. Alignment dowels ensure that the battery aligns with the vehicle connections. With fixed connections, there is no room for error. Even a small error can damage a connector which may not be serviced separately from the battery or the harnesses. Installation procedures may include: -Positioning the battery under the vehicle in the same orientation as when removed -Raising the battery to the vehicle or lowering the vehicle to the battery -Using a borescope to visually determine connections are precisely aligned before mating the battery to the body. Adjacent parts may be removed to provide access -Installing mounting hardware in a specified sequence and torqued to specifications -Verifying all one-time-use hardware is replaced -HV-Battery-Enclosure Leak Test – some vehicle makers have an HV-battery-enclosure leak test. This is a specialized test to determine if the battery enclosure is properly sealed. This is not typically performed in a collision repair facility. Vehicle makers require a special, low-pressure-test, tool kit that is attached to ports or connections on the battery. This may use shop air attached to a regulator and valve assembly. Additional vent and connection seals may be required. During the test, very low air pressure is applied. The system is isolated and monitored for a set time to see if there is a drop in pressure, indicating a leak. This should only be performed by a qualified EV-service technician using vehicle-maker procedures and equipment -Electric Drive Assembly Removal and Installation – typically, the electric drive assembly is removed as a modular unit with the motor, gearbox, and other attached parts. This may be compared to removing an engine and transmission in a regular vehicle. Specific requirements vary by vehicle. Typical steps include shutting down the HV, draining the coolant, and disconnecting electrical cables, coolant hoses, drive axles, and other required parts. The A/C system compressor may remain in the vehicle or be removed with the drive module, depending on the vehicle. Vehicle makers may have specific tools, fixtures, and lifting equipment requirements to perform this operation. The assembly is usually removed from beneath the vehicle and may include the suspension crossmember on some vehicles -Charging Port Removal and Installation – the charge port may need to be removed for access to repair attached or adjacent panels. It may need to be removed due to damage. this is a bolt-on part operation that may require the removal of trim, access panels, or other parts. The HV should be shut down before performing the service operations. Protect the charge port and cables from damage, debris, overspray, or other contaminants. Special alignment tools may be used during installation. Verify the charge port door is properly aligned with adjacent panels and operates as designed with all release mechanisms, both electrical and manual. Connector and wiring harness repair are not authorized. Verify operation of the charge cable and lock operation after reassembly. -Cooling System for EV Parts – EV, cooling system parts may be the most diverse across different vehicle makers. How the EV, HV system parts are cooled can vary greatly. Many of the cooling system parts are in the front area of the vehicle. These parts may connect to the HV battery, rear drive motor, and a variety of different modules. Most of the system parts such as the radiator, lines, and hoses are similar in nature to conventional vehicles. It is important to reference the specific service information for the vehicle on which you are working -Positive Temperature Coefficient (PTC) – Evs may have very complex thermal management system designs and requirements for service. EVs typically have PTC heating devices in the system to heat the coolant. The EV cooling system may tie in with the A/C system of the vehicle using a chiller which is a coolant-to-refrigerant heat exchanger. Liquid cooling systems circulate the coolant through the system parts using different circulation pumps and valves. This manages the flow and temperature for proper operating temperatures as needed. -Cooling System Pressure Test – pressure testing the EV system is very similar to a conventional cooling system test. This test determines if there is a leak. Specific adapters may be required. If the system is not holding pressure and there aren’t visual signs of coolant externally, additional testing is needed. This determines if there is an internal cooling-system leak within the battery or other EV system parts connected to the cooling system. This pressure test typically connects a pressure gauge to the reservoir. Pressure is applied and measured over a speficied period of time to determine if the pressure holds. EVs may use single or multiple cooling systems, requiring pressure testing of each -Cooling System Air Evacuation Service – after cooling system parts have been removed and replaced, make sure the system is filled, and no air remains in the system. In may HV cooling systems, a mixture of deionized or distilled water and ethylene glycol-based antifreeze is used. Always refer to the vehicle maker’s procedures for the proper fluids and mixture ratios. Coolant air evacuation procedures are done using recommended tools and service equipment. Procedures may require using a diagnostic tool to command a coolant fill or air purge routine. This turns on pumps and valves to allow coolant to flow into all areas of the system and forces air to the de-gas bottle. Some of these procedures may be extensive and time consuming to complete, require monitoring, and adding coolant. Some coolant pumps may be damaged if operated dry -Electrical Bonding Validation Test – this test, also referred to as equipotential test, is required after installing HV system parts. The chassis-ground connections for all HV system parts are extremely important for the safety of the system. When doing this test, the HV system should not be powered ON. All system parts are installed as designed. In some steps, you may need to disconnect or remove parts to further test. HV system parts must be properly grounded or bonded to the chassis. Typical steps to test-bonding include: -Cleaning all test probe contact points so they are free of paint, dirt, grease, or corrosion -Testing connectivity using a special milliohm meter and vehicle-maker-specified procedures -Using a Milliohm Test Meter – a milliohm meter is a special tester which passes current through the circuit or part to determine resistance. This is similar to a DVOM on a resistance range, but there are major differences as well. The milliohm meter operates at much higher current levels when testing a circuit or path. Very low resistance values can be measured that far exceed the accuracy of most DVOMs. The meter uses a 4-wire probe set, where the current supplied by the meter is flowing through one of the wires on each side of the lead set. The other wires are reading the voltage drop. The meter calculates the milliohm value. This permits verification of ground or the bonding paths very accurately. Some vehicle makers may integrate this function into their diagnostic tool requiring a special adapter with probes -HV-Isolation Test – an Hv-isolation test is performed to check the HV cables and parts for a malfunction that may cause electrical current leakage. This could present a safety hazard, arcing, fire, or other vehicle damage. a special tester that uses CAT III, 1,000 V-rated multimeter leads is required. The HV-isolation test amplifies HV of 500, 750, or 1,000 VDC to the circuit. HV applied by the meter, using very low current, reveals any potential isolation issues. A DVOM resistance test may not reveal these issues. Only a qualified HV-service technician using specialized test equipment performs this test. Always wear the proper PPE. -HV System Power-Up – after all the services has been performed, the EV must be returned to full operating condition by powering up the high-voltage system. This is typically a reverse order of the shutdown. Vehicle makers may have additional requirements identified in the service information -Conclusion – I-CAR encourages anyone working on EVs and HV systems to be properly trained, and acquire the necessary tools, equipment, and service information before attempting any repairs or service. Each step in a procedure is there for a reason. Skipping a step or omitting some required operation may introduce an unseen compromise or increased risk of injury or death. Don’t attempt to do any EV service repair that you are not qualified to perform. Get it right the first time; the customer is depending on it. Introduction to Workshop Information Systems (WIS) for Collision (X0009E-US.TTB) (Mercedes Benz) -X0009E-US.TTB – Pre-Test 1) Where does a red hyperlink direct you to? -Information which can be found within the current document such as filling capacities, torque values, or special tools X - wrong 2) What information can be used to identify a vehicle in WIS? -World manufacturing code X - wrong 3) Why is WIS valuable to the technician? -It gives technicians access to relevant repair documentation 4) In the document number AR09.4 1-P-6834MND, what does AR stand for? -General Information, quality information X - wrong 5) What search type is performed with all groups and information types selected by default? -Full-text search 6) Where can the online help function can be accessed? -In the WSM module X - wrong 7) What information does the Workshop Information System (WIS) module contain? -Literature on maintenance, repair, diagnosis and retrofitting of special equipment 8) What does the Operation Steps sub-tab display? -A step-by-step list of repair information and instructions 9) Which module is NOT used by MBUSA? -EPC X - wrong 10) In the document number BR01.30-Z-1005-06A, what does BR stand for? -Repair Materials X0009E-US.TTB - Lesson 1 Introduction to Workshop Information Systems (WIS) -WIS is short for Workshop Information System -Wis consists of four modules – WIS, ASRA, SSL, and MSS, with two external modules WSM and EPC -Not all modules, brans and vehicle types will be available to the user depending on his or her authorization -Vehicle Identification Number -&gt; the vehicle context is always visible. The display is similar to that in the EPC -Vehicle Identification Number -&gt; the vehicle model designation engine model description and major assembly model designations are automatically displayed. After a valid Vehicle Identification Number is entered, the vehicle model designation, engine model description and major assembly model designations are automatically displayed in the drop-down menus. -The standard functions are always available as symbols at the top right -They allow the vehicle data card to be displayed, the current search context to be printed, the vehicle context to be completely erased, display model designation, current search context, accessing online help, and finally creation of feedback X0009E-US.TTB – Lesson 2 Vehicle Identification -A vehicle is identified in WIS through one of the following inputs: -External Chassis Number (VIN), Internal Chassis Number (FIN) or the Baumuster -Vehicle Identification Number has a World Manufacturer Code or WMC -This is Vehicle Identification Number minus the WMC -You can see the vehicle model, vehicle model designation -Sales designation e.g. S 550 -&gt; vehicle details also have a Sales designation -Engine model designation -&gt; vehicle details also have a Sales designation, Engine model and Engine model designation -Transmission model designation -&gt; vehicle details also have a Sales designation, Engine model and Engine model designation, and Transmission model, transmission model designation -Overview of major assemblies -&gt; hitting the arrow opens a drop-down overview of major assemblies. Note: Major assembly menu is replaced with the Transmission assembly when using VIN for search -Selecting the icon opens Vehicle data card -The vehicle data card contains information which is sometimes required when searching for literature -Sales designation -&gt; sales designation S 550 -Information on paint and equipment -Information on major assembly numbers (engine, transmission, axles, steering etc.) -Information on special equipment -SA Codes -The top section of the data card displays the vehicles master data -The bottom half of the data card displays the SA codes and SA numbers -Which of the following is NOT a part of the Vehicle data card -&gt; Current search context to be printed -&gt; Current search context to be printed is a symbol of the Standard functions bar at the top-right corner of WIS and not a part of Vehicle data card X0009E-US.TTB – Lesson 3 WIS Groups and Information Types -In the WIS module, the literature is divided into information types and groups -1) Information types – the information types identify the type of literature -Repair info -Diagnosis info -Circuit diagrams -Basic data -Organization -2) Group types – the groups designate to which group a vehicle component or vehicle system is assigned -Overall vehicle -Complete engine, crankcase ventilation, cylinder head, crankcase -Crank assembly -Engine timing -Fuel cell system -etc. -3) Range of Groups – the range of groups start with group 00 and ends with group 99 -The division of literature into information types and groups allows literature to be found in a targeted manner -Find the document that illustrates how much oil to put in an engine -Look at the IT column -Find the letters bf that sand for Filing capacity -Every WIS document is identified by a document number. The information types and groups are components of a document number -&gt; Document identified with IT and document number -Look at the screen. You are looking for information on Testing and repair work information on oil filter housing. What information will you check in the document? -&gt; Search for testing and repair information type – AR and group type 18:20 X0009E-US.TTB – Lesson 4 WIS Document Numbers -In the WIS module, all documents feature a document number. The document number is a unique identifier. A document can be found using the document number in document number search mode -If this document is found in another language, the document number is identical -AR20.00-p-1142GZC -AR -&gt; Information Type -20 -&gt; Group Number -00-&gt; Sub-group Number -p- -&gt; Author Index -&gt; -D=Dussldorf -G=Gaggenau -L=Ludwigsfelde -M=Mannheim -N=Commercial vehicles-Stuttgart -P=Passenger cars -T=Turkey -W=Commercial vehicles-Worth -Z=Head office -1142GZC - In the end is the number issued by the database and cannot be interpreted by the user -All documents feature the same structure, which makes them easier to use for users -The Document sub tab is the main sub tab and combines all the information for the other sub tabs into one convenient tab -The Picture sub tab displays only the pictures within the selected document -The Operations steps sub tab displays the risk and dangers of the job, as well as the step by step instructions for the task -The Red document number hyperlink takes you to an additional document which matches the vehicle data entered -A Gray document number hyperlink will take you to an additional document which DOES NOT MATCH the vehicle data entered -Selecting the Blue document hyperlink will take you to adjustment values within the document -The Basic data sub tab displays general information with regards to the task -The Tightening torques sub tab will display the Newton Meters require to tighten specific bolts -The Filling capacities sub tab illustrates max and min levels. See the example of different mixtures depending on temperature -The Picture2 sub tab displays pictures of tools and equipment required to perform the requested task -Please note: It is possible to navigate directly to the individual objects using the tabs at the top of the document. If a topic is selected via the tab and printing is carried only the scope of the selected topic is printed and not the entire document -A Red hyperlink in WIS document?-&gt; directs you to document number of a further document which matches the vehicle data entered X0009E-US&gt;TTB – Lesson 5 Search Variants -Standard Search -&gt; -Vehicle data -Group(s) and -Information type(s) -Table of Contents -&gt; -This type of literature search requires initial selection of an information type (e.g. Maintenance and care = AP, Special tools = WS etc.) The user is then guided step-by-step to the desired document. -Search can be carried out without first entering vehicle data -Document Number -&gt; -Searching for literature by entering a complete or incomplete document number is a quick way of searching for documents whose document number is known or the ones with similar document numbers -Search can be carried out without first entering vehicle data -Operation Number -&gt; -WIS finds the documents which are directly linked to the operation number which is entered -It is not necessary to first specify groups and information types -Full-Text Search -&gt; -In this type, the search term must be contained within the text of the document. -The search is performed with all groups and information types selected by default -Begin search by entering Vehicle Data input like complete VIN. Type 4JG1660241A040677 in the Vehicle Identification Number bar. - Note: you can also just select the vehicle model to the vehicle model and the vehicle model designation. This should only be done in exceptional cases because the system will then also find literature which may not applicate to the vehicle in question. When using only a chassis code to search for WIS information the data card is unavailable -Select Standard from the Search mode drop-down list -Select group 18 -Engine Lubrication, engine oil cooling – from the Selection of Group(s). click the plus sign to the left of the group to extend the group and display the subgroups. -Select the information types that we want to search. First, expand all the options on the information types by clicking the plus sign next to each type. Then, select Filing Capacities under Basic data and select Start search tab. -Hyperlinks in gray do not apply to our VIN. The two hyperlinks in red apply to our search. Select the first choice to see our options. -When you do not have vehicle data and you need to find literature on particular information type, you can use the Table of Contents to search for the required documents on WIS. Here are some examples where you can select the information type from the Table of Contents for required information -Note: It is preferable to find vehicle-specific literature (tightening torques, filling capacities, testing and repair work etc.) using the default (Standard) search mode -Select the Table of contents button -A list of Information types is displayed -Select the document for the required Information type depending on the type of vehicle -Let’s search for document for overall vehicle. Start document search by selecting Show document button -Drill down further for the appropriate literature -You can view the literature -If vehicle data is entered, the links (documents) matching the vehicle are displayed in red text. Searching for literature using vehicle data simplifies the search. Alternatively, use vehicle data and then switch to the Table of contents search -If vehicle data are entered, the links (documents) which match the vehicle are displayed in red text. You can see the information type in the left column -Select and view the required literature -A user needs literature which describes a work operation. The user does not know the group and information type of the document. However, the user can use a keyword. In this case, full-text search mode may be helpful. This search mode allows the user to search for a document by entering a search term -You can define the selection criteria and the system searches for the search term in the title or in the entire text (contents) of the literature -Select the Search mode as Full-text search and enter the Search term of hit the advance search button -Select the required search option in the Advanced full-text search pop-up window and type in the search term -Choose “Capacities: Passenger cars: Engine lubrication, engine oil cooling” from the list of documents -Select the Filling capacities tab and scroll the document -Select the Filling capacities sub tab and scroll the document A user is looking for information on Metris Passenger Van and needs information on removal of an upper-longitudinal member. The user does not have the document number or the details of group type and information type. Which search mode will be most suitable? -&gt; Use of keywords or search term in Full-text search. -&gt; Using keywords or search term in Full-text search is most appropriate when you do not have document numbers or details of group type or information type. X0009E-US.TTB – Lesson 6 WIS Online Help -Wis provides the user with a contextual online help function which is very comprehensive and easy-to-use. Selecting the HELP icon opens the WIS Online Help. You can search for information using either the Help topics tab or the Start search tab -A list of topics is displayed in the Help topics tab. Selecting the Help topics tab displays a list of help topics in the left navigation bar. You can open the required topic by selecting it from the list. -A quick search of the required topic can be conducted in the Start search tab by using a search term. Selecting the Start search tab shows the Search input field. You can type the term or the keywords you want the information on. -The search brings up a few topics matching the search term. Choose the appropriate topic to explore further. You can select the most appropriate topic from the list of related topics displayed through this search You want to search for some information on Vehicle Data Card. However, you are not sure of the exact topic name in the help menu. Which of the following will be most appropriate search option? – Select the START SEARCH Tab and type “Vehicle Data Card” in the SEARCH TERM field. Open the most appropriate topic from the list displayed. X0009E-US.TTB – Lesson 7 Summary X0009E-US.TTB – Lesson 8 Groups and Operation Items -In the “ASRA” module, the search for operation items is carried out first by identifying the vehicle with the vehicle identification number or model designation number, then defining groups and finally selecting the operation items. The selected operation items can be edited further in the other steps. -Task: you are looking for operation items on the complaint replace radiator -Step 1) Input the vehicle data -Step 2) Select ASRA module -The ASRA module is displayed with the “Define groups” step activated -Step 3) Use the scroll bar to go to group 20 -Step 4) Click the + icon -Select the subgroup 20.3865 – Radiator -The group is displayed in the “Selected groups” list. The “Select operation items” button in the Control bar is activated -To define groups with an ASRA picture -Step 1) Use the scroll bar to go to group 20 -Step 2) Click the + icon -The available ASRA pictures are displayed -Step 3) Select the ASRA picture -Step 4) Select subgroup number 3865 Radiator in the ASRA picture -In “Select operation items” you can display the Included work, Notes and Additional operations and select the operation items to be carried out. Select the U icon to display the included work text. Select the folder icon to display the additional operations -Use the option buttons (check mark icon) to select the operation items. -The determined operation items are displayed in the “Edit operation items list” step and can be edited there. The working hours are added up. By clicking in the “ZM” input field, you can enter your own time allowed. The new working hours are calculated and displayed as an underlined text. “ZM” = Time prescribed by foreperson X0009E-US.TTB – Lesson 9 Summary X0009E-US.TTB – Post Test What does the Operation Steps sub-tab display? -&gt; A step-by-step list of repair information and instructions Where does a red hyperlink direct you to? -&gt; An external document that matches the vehicle data entered Which module is NOT used by MBUSA? -&gt; EPC – X – wrong – WIS – X - wrong Which is NOT shown on the vehicle data card? -&gt; Damage Codes Why is WIS valuable to the technician? -&gt; It gives technicians access to relevant repair documentation In the document number AH54.00-P-1000-01A, what does AH stand for? -&gt; General Information, quality information What does a blue hyperlink direct you to? -&gt; Information which can be found within the current documents such as filling capacities, torque values, or special tools What search type is performed with all groups and information types selected by default? -&gt; Full-text search In the document number AR09.4 1-P-6834MND, what does AR stand for? Testing and repair work The vehicle datacard only appears when using what type of vehicle identification? VIN Glue Pull Repair (GPR) -What is GPR? – glue pull repair was born out of the paint less dent repair (PDR) industry. Early GPR technology was not suited for the advancements in today’s vehicles. Adhesives and tabs were weak and did not perform very well, oftentimes breaking or releasing from the panel surface. Innovations have helped the GPR industry to improve the dent removal capabilities. There is more diversity in the size, construction, and surface area of the tabs. The adhesives formulas are capable of withstanding greater pulling forces. Thinner metals used by vehicle makers are also contributing factor to the success of this method. New designs in lifting tools have increase the options for different types of damage. For example, GPR tools have the ability to repair a wide range of dents from large area dents to very small dents. GPR is a viable candidate for almost all sheet metal dent removal for both steel and aluminum. -How Does GPR and PDR Compare? – both GPR and PDR are techniques for removing panel dents. With PDR, the action for dent removal is by pushing the dent from behind. This may require that trim and moldings be removed for access. With GPR, the action for removing a dent is by pulling the dent out, making R&amp;I of trim and moldings unnecessary in most cases. Technicians can also use a combination of pushing and glue-pulling to achieve the desired results. Both GPR and PDR require an understanding of how the metal will react during the removal process. They both require a well thought-out repair plan for the best results -Advantages of GPR – one of the greatest advantages of GPR, when compared to weld-on stud-pulling techniques, is GPR does not require coatings, such as paint and E-coat, to be removed. Additionally, GPR does not damage the backside of the repair, so corrosion treatments are not disturbed -Advantages of GPR (cont’d) – another advantage is GPR can be used during the blueprinting process to understand how the metal or dent is going to react. This is useful when determining if the panel can be repaired or needs to be replaced. A technician can make an initial pull with little preparation required -Limitations – GPR is limited to steel and aluminum sheet metal. Although GPR is typically successful on most panel dents, some small dents, such as those that are less than a quarter in size or adjacent to two body lines, are difficult to achieve a successful pull. Some GPR adhesive is formulated to provide the greatest adhesion to the OEM clear coat. When this type of adhesive is applied to bare metal, the adhesion strength is half of what it normally is on an OEM clearcoat surface. If the panel has been refinished, its likely that paint damage may occur if GPR is attempted -Pull Tabs – glue pulling tabs come in a variety of different shapes and sizes to match unique dents. One of the biggest advancements is the design of tabs with a smooth surface. This provides increased adhesion strength. Some tabs have an articulated design that permits flexibility to match contours or adhere to deep dents. Different round-shaped tabs allow for a wide range of dent sizes and dent depth. Some are small enough to allow for small, precise pulls for hail damage-sized dents. Depending on the manufacturer, tabs may have different attachment designs for the lifting devices. Some manufacturers have designed tabs with a plastic coated metal framework to provide increased strength to allow for increased pulling forces to be applied when pulling -Adhesives – the most common GPR adhesive are hot glue sticks. Adhesives are heated to specific temperatures using a hot glue gun. The adhesive is typically applied directly to the pull tab being used. The temperature at which the glue is being applied to the tab and temperature when pulling is very important. Often, failures in GPR can be attributed to the glue not being the correct temperature. Safety must be observed when applying the hot glue to prevent burns to the skin. glue sticks are formulated to provide many different options based on strength, temperature range, and working time. Most shops typically require only a couple of different types due to their controlled ambient temperature. Another option is the use of cold-type adhesives. This cold-glue adhesive system uses a standard slide hammer for dent removal. The greatest advantage of cold glue is that it requires very little setup which saves time in the process. The adhesion levels of cold glue are less than that of hot glue, and therefore, is not a one-for-one replacement -Lifting Tools – in many cases, lifting tools used with welded tab-type dent repair can also be used with GPR tabs. Typically, the size and location of the dent determine the type of lifter to use. Pulling beams and bars are designed to provide controlled, steady, pulling pressure for larger, deep dents in panels, doors, seams, and bodylines. Slide hammers provide a quick and forceful pull when used with hot and cold glue tabs. Mini-lifters are useful for precision pulls and are compatible with the tiniest of detailing glue tabs to larger body tabs. A selection of these types of lifting devices typically cover most GPR dent types -Lifting Tools (cont’d) – another example of a lifting tool is this portable 5-ton pulling tower that can be used to remove damage that requires additional strength during the pull. In this example, the 5-ton ram is being used to repair a damaged outer rocker panel -Knockdown Tools – knockdown tools are used in the GPR process to tap down the high spots. There are many different types, shapes, and sizes of knockdown tools. To perform a successful dent repair, its vital that the technician understands when each of these types of tools are used. A blending hammer has a polished metal face and a plastic tip that can be used to knock down the high spots during the pulling process. Knockdowns and holders are used when precision corrections need to be made. The holders ensure that the knockdown tool maintains a 90-degree angle to the area being worked -Developing a Repair Plan – regardless of the GPR system being used, the basic process will be very similar. In every case, the technician should evaluate the damage to determine a repair plan and then perform these typical steps. -1) clean the surface to remove all dirt and grime -2) check the damage to determine the type of metal and the panel temperature -3) choose the glue, tabs, lifting tools, and knockdowns that are required -4) coat the tab with glue -5) correct by pulling out the lows and knocking down the highs -6) continue until the dent is removed or has reached the level of repair required for paint -Handoff or Continue GPR? – during the GPR process, a decision is made about how much of the damage will be removed. The dent may be reduced to the point where 80-90 percent of the damage is removed. The repair may then be handed off for completion using conventional body filler and paint methods. Depending on the damage, the decision may be to continue refining the damage-removal process until it is completely removed using more precision tools and techniques. The determination is typically a business decision or based on the skill level of the technician performing the GPR Hem Flange panel replacement -Hem flanges are commonly used to attach the outer panel to the inner panel/frame of doors, hoods, deck lids, liftgates, and similar parts. They may also be used on some quarter panel wheel openings to the outer wheel housing. Adhesives are typically used to add strength to hemmed joints. -removing a hemmed panel requires opening the hem or grinding the panel edge to release the hem. -Grinding Method – removing the edge of the hem flange using a disc grinder. Grind until separation between the outer panel and the door shell is visible. Some panel designs may require cutting an access hole to help remove the skin. Removing the spot welds around the window frame (if equipped) -Hem Flange Opening Tool – an air hammer removal bit is another tool that may be used on the door skin flange to unfold the flange from the door frame. A special bit installed in a pneumatic (air) hammer may be used to open the hem flange on some panels. There is a left and right bit to accommodate different direction operation and access. Care must be taken when using the tools to avoid damaging the door shell or underlying panel. When approaching highly/contoured areas and body lines, it may require stopping short of these areas and grinding the hem to avoid inner panel damage. Use an air hammer with a good feathering trigger to manage control of the bit. -Heat/Adhesive Release – after opening or grinding the hem flange, some panels may release easily from the mating flange. Heat may be required to release adhesives or foam. If using heat, it is recommended to use a flameless heat source and not to exceed 400 degrees F. The panel and remaining strip of flange may also be removed with a hammer and chisel (if necessary). Take care to avoid damage to the underlying panels or door frame. -Aluminum Skins – aluminum hem flanges may crack along the edge if hemmed flat; therefore, a rope hem flange is required. The rope hem flange leaves a bigger radius at the panel edge when completed. Extra care must be taken when hemming the flange to avoid striking the panel edge, making it flat. Special hem flange tools can assist with hemming flanges on aluminum. -Installation Area Preparation – After panel removal, clean any remaining adhesive from the flange area. A plastic-coated abrasive wheel is recommended to prevent thinning the metal. Foam or other materials that are in good condition may be left in place on the inner structure unless it presents a fire hazard. Damaged materials should be removed. Prepare the mating flanges for replacement panel installation following the vehicle maker and adhesive maker procedures. -Panel Fit Up – perform a test fit of the replacement panel. Straighten the attachment area with a hammer and dolly as required to ensure the correct shape and that the mating flanges fit properly. Make sure the vehicle is resting on its own suspension or supported evenly. With door skins, it is recommended to hem a small area of the flange on both sides of the door skin to hold the panel in place temporarily while the door is test fit to the vehicle to verify panel gaps and flushness. -Adhesive Application – prepare flanges and apply adhesive to the required areas, ensuring all mating flanges have coverage and adhesive squeeze out when the flange is hemmed. Door intrusion beams may have anti flutter foam, sealer, or adhesive between the door shell and skin. It is critical to use the vehicle maker’s recommended materials. If the flanges are bare metal, spread adhesive to ensure all bare metal is covered. Repeat this process on the outer panel. To ensure proper bond-line thickness, an additional bead may be applied to either the door skin or door shell. This bead does not get spread out. ** do not use one-part products between the door skin and intrusion beam as they may shrink and distort the skin. -Installation Considerations – most hem flange panels will require adhesive in the hem area and require completing the hem flange while the adhesive is wet. The part must have the correct shape and fit before the adhesive cures. After hemming the flanges, placing a door on the vehicle will permit adjustments to be made while the adhesive is wet. If the adhesive cures and the door is not the right shape (twisted), the panel may have to be removed and replaced to correct the issue. -Hammer and Dolly Considerations – when hemming the flange with a hammer and dolly, aim is critical to strike only the hem flange on the panel while not damaging the frame. There is a balance that needs to be realized between the hammer and dolly. Hold the dolly to support the skin in the area of the hammer strike. Changing the dolly size, weight, and amount of support will require adjustment to the strength of the hammer strike. Changing the amount of support can cause the panel to distort -Hemming Technique – with adhesive applied, set the panel in place and adjust the position by sliding it. Light-duty spring clamps can help hold the panel initially. Hem small areas at the corners and at the body lines to ensure the panel is positioned correctly, then continue to hammer the flange over in small increments, working around the panel. Caution: Hammering too aggressively can distort the panel and underlying door frame or wheel housing. Quarter panel wheel opening hems require a similar incremental approach, as the metal stretches to finish the hem and maintain the correct panel contour. A door skin hammer is designed to keep the hammer contact area focused to the hem. -Other Hem Tools and Considerations – there are specialty hem flange tools available that can reduce the time to complete the hemming process. Care must be taken to ensure the panel is positioned correctly and fixed in place so it does not move out of position while using these. Tightly curved or highly formed areas usually require hammer and dolly work. With the hemming complete and the panel fit to the vehicle, welds, rivets, or other fasteners (if required) can be installed. Assistance during the installation of larger panels can help with adhesive application and cleaning of tools during installation, as adhesive squeeze-out is likely. -Recycled Quarter Panels – Outer quarter panels with rolled hem flanges are not candidates for recycled part usage. This is due to the removal process required; the edge of the hem flange is either ground off or peeled open. Both removal methods damage the panel beyond reuse. During initial installation, the hem flange area stretches as the radius and hem are formed to close the flange. Attempting to open the flange back up causes the flange area to distort excessively, and introduces additional work hardening. Hybrid, Electric and Alternative Fuel Vehicle Service (1/2) Working safely -Consult Service Information – the procedures, requirements, and safety guidelines listed in this training are high-level examples and are NOT intended to serve as actual repair procedures. You MUST consult the vehicle maker service information for the vehicle you are servicing for the specific procedures and safety guidelines. -General Safety Information – hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) and electric vehicles (EVs) contain enough voltage to be lethal. Special care must be taken when servicing these vehicles to avoid injury. Careless handling of these systems can lead to serious injury or even death, and precautions given by the vehicle maker must always be followed. To find the specific precautions for the vehicle you are servicing, reference the vehicle maker service information. -Powering the System Up or Down – powering down the system, regardless of the method, only de-energizes the high voltage circuits and components outside of the HEV/EV battery pack. Dangerous voltage levels ALWAYS exist within the HEV/EV battery pack. For some vehicles, the system may be powered down by using the scan tool to disable and discharge the high voltage outside of the battery pack. If the scan tool cannot be used to power down the system, you will need to physically disable the system and then use a digital multimeter (DMM) to verify that the applicate connectors have a safe voltage level. Powering up the system involves reversing the actions taken to power down the system. -Manually Disabling the High Voltage System for Service – an example disabling procedure may include the following steps: -Secure the work area to prevent individuals with electronic medical life and health support devices from coming in contact with the vehicle -Shut off the vehicle and secure the keys -Disconnect the negative 12 volt battery cable and wait the prescribed amount of time; this varies by maker -Wearing appropriate PPE, disable the high voltage battery pack -Check the high voltage system for voltage using a DMM rated as CAT III 1000V -Delay the beginning of repairs until the DMM indicates zero volts on the high voltage system -Identifying High Voltage System Parts – for safety reasons, all high voltage wires are wrapped in an orange-colored insulation. Intermediate voltage wires may be any color, although blue or yellow are common. There are many different potentially dangerous electrical circuits, in excess of 100 volts, on electric and hybrid electric vehicles. Some examples of high voltage circuits include the -High voltage battery -Inverter -High voltage cables -Electric A/C compressor -Motor generator -Note: intermediate voltage wires typically carry between 30-60 volts and though some of these wires will be inside blue or yellow casing, there are no standard colors. Exercise caution around the intermediate voltage wires Troubleshooting -Battery and High Voltage System Inspection – damage to a lituim-ion battery pack could result in fire, loss of electrical insulation, or exposure to high voltage. When inspecting a battery pack, example procedures may include the following steps -Disconnect the 12 V battery -Inspect the battery pack for evidence of exposure to fire, foreign object intrustion, and water exposure -Inspect the battery coolant system for proper level -Inspect the following components for visible damage: electric A/C pump, 14 V power module, coolant heater, power/inverter module, battery charger, transmission case, HEV/EV battery charger receptacle, and the high voltage orange cables -Note: when performing an inspection of the high voltage system, it may be necessary to ensure the 12 V battery system is functioning properly before installing a scan tool to check for diagnostic trouble codes (DTCs) -Note Note: when inspecting high voltage systems, always wear the appropriate PPE, including safety glasses and insulated gloves, even if the system has been disabled. -Battery Removal and Installation – the hybrid battery is actually a battery pack that is housing many individual battery cells. Before performing any work on the battery, consult the service information for all applicable warnings and cautions. Batteries are typically located under the floorboards, under the rear back seat, or in the cargo compartments. -Preparation – below are some example steps you should take before safely removing the battery -Disconnect the negative cable to the 12 V battery -Wait at least 90 seconds to prevent airbag and seat belt pre-tensioner activation -Remove the trim and/or floorboards to gain access to the hybrid battery -Wear insulating gloves and remove the service plug or turn the module switch to OFF, depending on the model -Wait 5 minutes before touching the high voltage connectors and terminals -Remove any additional trim as necessary to access the battery -Battery Removal/Installation – the following are example steps required to remove a hybrid battery -Disconnect the high voltage cables (orange) -Remove any electrical connectors (such as harnesses, interlocks, and relays connectors) -Disconnect and remove the battery cooling assembly, fans, and hoses -Remove the hybrid battery hose assembly -Remove the carrier bracket -Remove the bolts, connectors, and clamps -Install the hangers or eyes as directed by service information, and attach appropriate lifting tackle and shop cranes to lift the battery -Lift the battery out of the vehicle, being careful not to scratch the finish -Note: installation is the same steps in the reverse order -The Diagnostic Process – when diagnosing a concern with a hybrid/electric vehicle, the procedures for gathering information about the concern are the same as when diagnosing a concern with a conventionally powered vehicle -Talk to the customer in order to thoroughly understand the concerns and symptoms -Inspect the vehicle for obvious damage or conditions related to the concern -Check for technical service bulletins that may relate to the concern -Verify that there are no purely mechanical concerns -Note: after verifying that the concern is NOT purely mechanical, you should -Verify the vehicle powers up normally -Use a scan tool to confirm that the vehicle networks are communicating properly and to check for DTCs -Note: if the concern persists, continue with the symptom diagnostic procedure provided in the vehicle maker service information -Scan Tools – when using a scan tool to perform system diagnostics, some example procedures may include the following steps -Verify the vehicle is in service mode and powers up correctly -Perform a vehicle DTC scan and confirm the control modules are communicating with the scan tool -Verify there are no control module internal performance DTCs -Verify there are no control module power or communication DTCs -Perform any additional tests required by the vehicle maker, and perform necessary repairs following vehicle maker service procedures -Digital Multimeters – digital multimeters are indispensable when trying to diagnose the HEV/EV. Depending on the circuit, some diagnostic flow charts will indicate the need to use either a mega ohmmeter or a milli ohmmeter. The mega ohmmeter, or insulation meter, is capable of safely testing the high voltage components on the vehicle, provided the vehicle’s high voltage system is disconnected. The milli ohmmeter is designed to read very small amounts of resistance. Be aware that temperature and humidity can greatly affect smaller ohm readings. -Note: any DVOMs used on HEVs/EVs must be safety rated as Category III (1000V) to safely test the circuits on the vehicle -AC Inverter Troubleshooting – the following is an example procedure for troubleshooting an AC system high voltage DTC. Inspect the AC inverter -1) Wear appropriate PPE and disconnect the high-voltage connectors -2) Disconnect the AC electric inverter connector. -3) Measure the resistance of the body ground. If the resistance is not within specification, replace the inverter. -Inspect the Inverter Compressor -Disconnect the electric inverter compressor -Measure the resistance of the body ground. If resistance is not within specification, replace the compressor -If resistance is within specification, continue testing by reconnecting the inverter compressor -Reconnect the high voltage connector -Turn on the power switch -Set the air conditioning (AC) setting temperature to 77 degrees F -Operate the compressor for 10 minutes to collect as much compressor oil as possible -Turn the power off and allow the vehicle to cool overnight -Disconnect the high voltage connector -Measure the resistance of the body ground. If the resistance is within specification, the system is OK. -Replacing an Electric A/C Pump – an electric A/C pump/compressor is located in the C/C cooling loop and is used to cool the passenger compartment. In conventional engines, this would have been a belt-driven pump; in electric and hybrid vehicles, it is electric and is driven only by the high voltage battery. The electronic control module (ECM) takes into account a number of inputs before allowing power to be sent from the battery to the A/C pump -Compressor Oil – electric A/C systems use polyester (POE) oil. This oil has insulating properties that prevent it from conducting electricity. Compressor oil should be clean, with no debris. Dark brown/black colors, debris, or pungent and unusual odors all indicate the system should be inspected and that it possible needs to be flushed and the oil replaced. If the pump is replaced, be sure to follow vehicle maker service requirements to identify the correct type and amount of oil to be added to the system. -Resistance Checks – after disabling the high voltage system, use a mega ohmmeter or insulation meter to check the resistance of the electrical connectors on the A/C pump. The resistance should be very high, around 2 mega ohms. -Preventing Contamination – even a small amount of moisture in the A/C system can cause corrosion and degraded system performance. That is why it is important to protect lines and parts from moisture and air. Before servicing the system, you should have all the necessary parts and tools on hand. Always clean around fittings before removal to reduce the possibility of contaminants entering the system. Open the system for the shortest amount of time possible, and immediately cap or seal any open lines, fittings, and ports when opened. Keep system parts capped or sealed until you are ready to proceed with the assembly and sealing of the system. -Leak Detection – inspect the system to identify any obvious breach in the system parts. If no obvious issues are found, turn the system on to verify the system is cooling properly and the blower motor and cooling fans are working. Compare the air temperature at the outlet vents with the expected readings listed in the service manual. Check the system for leaks using an electronic tester and dye, beginning with the fittings and joints. Refrigerant is heavier than air, so be sure to use a sniff tester to “sniff” the lower areas of the part being tested. Electric and Hybrid Parts Service -Cooling System – EVs and HEVs may have separate cooling systems, with individual roles. For instance, some HEVs have three separate cooling systems: -The electronics cooling system cools the accessory power module, battery charger, and drive motor generator power inverter module. -The battery pack cooling system cools and heats the battery. The battery is cooled and heated using a heat exchanger and the electric A/C compressor motor control module assembly. A high voltage heater inside the battery can also heat the coolant entering the battery when needed. -The engine cooling system cools the engine and provides heat to the passenger compartment -Note: depending on the model and vehicle maker, the A/C system may be used to help with battery cooling. -Battery Charger – the following is an example procedure for removing and installing a battery charger -Remove the battery park upper component and cover -Disconnect the high voltage cable terminals and battery charger cable terminals -Disconnect the battery charger connector -Remove the battery charger -To install, reverse the steps -Note: always ensure the high voltage system is disabled and discharged prior to starting system service -Electric Motors – depending on the vehicle maker, the electric motor may be called a generator or drive motor. An example procedure for replacing the motor includes the following steps -Review and comply with the high voltage safety information -Disable the high voltage system -Remove the fasteners and connectors -Drain the transmission fluid -Remove the components connected to the motor, including the driveshafts, A/C compressor unit, transmission control connector, any electrical connections, transmission connections, power inverter, and gasket. -To install the motor, reverse the steps. -Inverter/Converter – the inverter/converter may be called the power inverter module or the drive motor generator power inverter module, depending on the vehicle maker. The inverter/converter converts high voltage direct current (DC) to 3-phase alternating current (AC) electrical energy. It is typically mounted directly to the transmission. -The Cooling System – the inverter/converter is cooled by a cooling system that is separate from the engine cooling system. The system typically uses a heat exchanger at the front of the vehicle and coolant that is circulated by electric pumps. -Intelligent Power Unit – some vehicles are equipped with an intelligent power unit (IPU), which combines a DC-AC converter, a DC-DC converter, a battery pack, engine control unit, and call voltage sensor into one component that powers the electric propulsion motor. An example of an IPU removal procedure may include the following steps -Review and comply with all high voltage precautions -Turn off the service plug -Disconnect the high voltage motor power inverter module cable -Remove the trunk rear side trim panel -Remove the rear IPU frame bar, the IPU outlet joint, and the air inlet duct -Disconnect the electrical connector -Remove the IPU assembly -Remove the IPU outlet duct, connectors, harness clips, inlet joint fitting, and the upper cover. -To install, reverse the steps Hybrid, Electric and Alternative Fuel Vehicle Service (2/2) Repair Considerations -Shop Safety – in addition to typical shop safety requirements, servicing alternative fuel vehicles requires the shop to observe additional safety rules. Check the state and federal requirements for specifics. As an example, if hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles require service to the hydrogen storage tanks or the fuel-cell stack, or associated fittings, regulations may require the shop to be ‘hardened’ or the vehicle to be in a ‘minimum-fueled state’. Hardened shops may be required to have hydrogen detectors, curtains around the work area, and explosion-proof light fixtures. Minimum-fueled state typically means that no more than 0.5 kilograms of hydrogen remains. Shops servicing compressed natural gas (CNG) or liquid propane gas (LPG) vehicles may also have special requirements. These requirements may include lighting fixtures ceiling fans classified as Class 1, Division 2, and increased ventilation and methane detectors. -CNG and LPG Identification – most CNG fueled vehicles are conversions. CNG vehicles made by a vehicle marker are generally identifiable by the nameplate. CNG conversions are identifiable by: -1) A label inside the fuel-filler door, or a decal on the vehicle -2) A fuel-filler valve instead of, or in addition to, a gasoline filler neck -3) Stainless steel fuel lines, which may have a sheathing cover. -Most liquid propane gas (LPG) vehicles are conversions with no official emblem or nameplate for identification. These vehicles are identifiable by the: -1) Fuel-filler valve, instead of, or in addition to, a gasoline filler neck -2) Torpedo- or doughnut-shaped fuel tanks either in the cargo area, underside, or on the truck bed -3) Copper fuel lines, which may be covered by a sheathing. -4) A label inside the fuel door -Disabling a CNG or LPG Fuel System – disabling a CNG or LPG fuel system will involve similar procedures and typically involves removing the fuel pressure from the lines. This procedure will be different based on system design, so it is important to identify the maker of the system you will be servicing and the service requirements and safety precautions. An example service procedure for releasing fuel pressure from a CNG system may include the following steps: -1) Place the vehicle securely on a lift -2) Relieve the fuel pressure between the engine and the manual shut-off valve by closing the manual shut-off valve and running the engine until it stalls -3) Relieve the fuel pressure between the fuel tank and the engine (or between the fuel receptacle and the fuel tank) by opening the manual shut-off valve and disconnecting the connector from the tank to the engine. Run the engine until it stalls -4) Relieve the fuel pressure at the fuel tank. The method for doing this may vary, depending on whether the engine runs. -Checking for Leaks – to check for leaks on a CNG or LPG vehicle, follow the product maker procedure for leak detection, stop and repair it, then move on to the next inspection point. An example leak detection procedure may include the following steps: -1) Verify the fuel pressure regulator holds a vacuum. Replace it if it does not -2) Inspect the fuel lines and hoses for damage -3) With the manual shut-off valve open, leave the engine off and turn the ignition switch to ON and then to LOCK 2-3 times to raise the fuel pressure in the fuel lines -4) Use a leak detector to check the lines and the vent hose outlet -5) Raise the vehicle on a lift and remove the under-floor cover -6) Inspect all fuel lines -7) Remove the rear seat and check all fuel lines and fittings at the fuel tank and the fuel joint block -Note: stop the engine and keep heat, sparks, and flames away from the vehicle -Compressed Gas Cylinders – when servicing a CNG or LPG fuel tank, it is important to remember the fuel is highly flammable and under pressure. Use caution to avoid heat, sparks, and flames while servicing the fuel tank. An example service procedure for removing and installing a CNG or LPG fuel tank may include the following steps: -1) Relieve the fuel pressure between the fuel tank and the engine by opening the manual shut-off valve and disconnecting the connector from the tank to the engine. Run the engine until it stalls and then turn the ignition switch to LOCK -2) Remove the lines attached to the tank -3) Remove all vehicle trim and accessories to gain access, and then remove the mounting hardware -4) Remove the tank from the vehicle -To re-install the tank, reverse the steps and then follow the leak detection procedures to ensure the fuel system is sealed properly -Note: when disconnecting and reconnecting hoses, make sure all fittings are clean prior to disconnecting and that all open fittings are protected to prevent contamination. -Hydrogen Vehicles – hydrogen fuel cell vehicles are uncommon in most areas, but they can typically be identified by badging containing the phrase Fuel Cell or FC. Some vehicles will contain badging identifying the vehicle as Hydrogen EV. Vehicles that utilize a hydrogen fuel cell combine hydrogen and oxygen to produce electricity, which runs an electric motor and charges the battery. These vehicles are considered EVs, but their range and refueling process are comparable to conventionally powered vehicles. Because hydrogen-powered vehicles convert the hydrogen into electricity, the only by products are heat and water, meaning the vehicles do not create tailpipe pollution. Hybrid Vehicle Identification and Damage Analysis (1/3) Hybrid Electric and Electric Vehicle Parts -Terms and Acronyms – this course will refer to electric vehicles as a collective term that includes all types of vehicles with some level of electric propulsion. Common course acronyms include: -HV = High Voltage -HEV = Hybrid Electric Vehicle -PHEV = Plug-In Hybrid Vehicle -EV = Pure-Electric Vehicle -DC = Direct Current -AC = Alternating Current -V = Volt -Electric Vehicle Types – types of electric vehicles include -EVs, where the only means of propulsion is an electric motor to power the transmission and turn the wheels -HEVs, where a conventional internal combustion (IC) engine is combined with an electric motor to propel the vehicle. The HV battery is recharged by the IC engine and regenerative braking. -PHEVs, which have batteries that can be restored to full charge by plugging into the power grid. This allows the vehicle to run on electric power longer than HEVs. There is still an IC engine, though it is smaller than HEV engines. -Extended-range EVs, which use a small IC engine to power an electric generator that charges the battery system. Only the electric motor propels the vehicle. The IC engine charges the HV battery and assists the electric motors during extended range. -HEV Types – there are two basic categories of HEVs. These include full hybrids that are capable of being propelled by the electric motor alone, and mild hybrids that are not capable of propelling the vehicle with only the electric motor. On a mild hybrid, the electric motor only assists the IC engine during acceleration. Within those two broad categories, there are different ways to configure HEVs. These configurations include. -Series hybrids, where the IC engine turns a generator, which both powers an electric motor to propel the vehicle and charges the HV battery. -Parallel hybrids, where both the IC engine and the electric motor are connected to the wheels in two different power paths – only the IC engine can power the vehicle on its own. -Combination series/parallel hybrids, where there are still parallel power paths, but either the IC engine or the electric motor can propel the vehicle by itself – the electric motor is also used as a second power source to assist the IC engine. -HV Parts – the HV battery is commonly either a lithium-ion or lithium-polymer type. Some hybrids use nickel-metal hydride batteries and these may be rated up to 350 volts or higher depending on the vehicle. The battery is often located in the back of the vehicle, either behind or under the rear seats, or in the trunk area. HV batteries are typically heavily protected by their central location and with steel reinforcements. Some vehicle makers suggest only having their factory-trained technicians perform HV battery removal and installation. The HV batteries typically have extended warranty parameters, such as 10 years and 100,000 miles, and damaging a battery during removal would void this warranty. In addition to the battery, HV parts include the control module, electric motor, inverter, and converter. * Damaged batteries should be recycled. Call the telephone number printed on the battery case for instructions on what to do with a damaged battery. -Control Module – a control module is necessary to both regulate and monitor the HV parts of the system. The control module: -Regulates the electrical energy between the HV battery, motor, and inverter -Controls the electrical energy between the converter and 12-volt electrical system, including the charging of the 12-volt auxiliary battery -Monitors the condition and state of charge of the HV battery -Is part of the 12-volt electrical system Control module -Electric Motor – all HEVs and EVs have at least one electric motor. Some have a two-motor system. The electric motor propels the vehicle or helps propel the vehicle. This motor assists the IC engine on most HEVs. The vehicle is propelled with both the electric motor and the IC engine, or with the electric motor alone for short periods. The electric motor is the only means of propulsion on EVs. The motor acts as the main source of propulsion on extended-range vehicles is used to assist the electric motor for propulsion during extended range and for charging the battery. In some vehicles, the electric motor also serves as a generator to charge the HV battery during regenerative braking. Gold motor in the middle is the small motor. Gold motor on the right is the large motor. -Inverter – an inverter changes DC from the HV battery into AC to run the electric motor. The AC generated by the electric motor is changed to DC to help recharge the HV battery. An inverter contains capacitors that store and release electrical energy. Once battery power is removed from an inverter, it typically takes a few minutes for the capacitors to discharge their stored electrical energy -Converter – a converter, housed in the inverter/converter assembly, acts like a conventional vehicle alternator. The converter -Changes the HV DC to 12 volts DC to run the 12-volt accessories on the vehicle. Excess 12-volt power is stored in the 12-volt auxiliary battery -Acts as the distribution center for power within the 12-volt system -Maintains the state of charge of the 12-volt battery -HV Charger – an HV charger is found on any electric vehicle that is plugged in, which includes all EVs, extended-range HEVs, and PHEVs. HV chargers contain a receptacle for an external charger to plug into a 110- or 220-volt AC charging station. An HV charger requires its own inverter to change the AC into DC for use by the HV battery. The charger may be in a relatively vulnerable location, such as behind the headlamp assembly or behind the front bumper. -HV Cables – HV power cables -Transmit the HV electrical energy from the battery to other HV parts -Typically have bright orange sheathing to make them easy to identify -Are placed in orange-colored corrugated plastic tubes for added protection from cuts and abrasions -Are covered by, or placed in, an additional housing where the cable is exposed to hazards on the vehicle underbody – the protective housing is typically not orange -12-Volt Auxiliary Battery – HEVs and EVs typically have an auxiliary 12-volt battery that powers the 12-volt electrical system. This battery powers the control modules for the HV system. The HV system will not function if the 12-volt battery is discharged. The 12-volt battery must be charged for the vehicle to start, even if the IC engine is started by the HV battery and electric motor. The 12-volt battery may be a special battery design – if the 12-volt auxiliary battery in an HEV requires replacement, it must be replaced with the correct battery. Dual 12-volt battery High Voltage Hybrid Vehicle Identification and Damage Analysis (2/3) Approaching a Damaged Electric Vehicle -Identifying an Electric Vehicle – the first indicator to identify an electric vehicle is the nameplate or emblem. The word “electric” is a positive indicator that this is an electric vehicle. -Emblems and Nameplates – for the purpose of this course, an emblem is the vehicle make emblem, such as the vehicle maker’s logo. Nameplates include model names and other attaching identifiers such as “Hybrid” or “Electric”. The first way to help determine if the vehicle being approached is an EV or HEV is to look for the emblems or nameplates. These may include the words “Electric” or “EV” for a pure-electric vehicle. The word “Hybrid” is used to indicate an HEV vehicle. Some vehicle makers use a blue shadow around their emblem if the vehicle is an EV or HEV. -Underhood Labeling – the next best place to look for identifiers of an EV or HEV is under the hood. Underhood labeling may include the word “Hybrid” or another identifier on the engine cover. Warning decals on the underside of the hood may detail precautions for HV parts. A first responder label calls attention to the cut tape label on the electric vehicle’s 12-volt battery cable to disconnect the 12-volt battery, thus disabling the HV system. There may be more than one cable that must be cut. Emergency responders are directed to cut through all the cables, as leaving one uncut will still supply 12 volts. A yellow first responder cut tape label displayed on the 12-volt battery cable indicates where a first responder should cut to disconnect the 12-volt battery. -Cables and Cable Colors – cable color is helpful to identify an HEV or EV. Low-voltage cables are typically colored black. There may be a range up to 30 volts DC and 15 volts AC for low voltage. Cables that carry HV have sheathing that is universally colored bright orange. Look for bright orange sheathing on underhood cables. Some vehicle makers use orange-colored sheathing for all voltage levels higher than 12 volts. There are cables on HEVs and EVs that carry intermediate voltage, and these may be colored blue or yellow. Color is just an indicator and cannot be used alone to determine voltage levels. Warning labels and service information are a better guide for the presence of high and intermediate voltage. -GM eAssist Vehicles – eAssist vehicles are equipped with a 130-volt lithium-ion battery in the rear. With no exterior nameplates, the vehicles can be identified by: -A bright orange cable underhood, which is connected to a starter/generator -Yellow first-responder cut tape labels around the 12-volt cables, also underhood -A battery icon in the trunk area -An “Auto Stop” position and economy gauge at the bottom of the speedometer or tachometer -Warning labels on top of the radiator core support and battery itself. -VIN Indicator – the vehicle maker may indicate on the VIN whether the vehicle is an EV or HEV. However, not all vehicle makers use the VIN for electric vehicle identification Ex: (picture did not load) 3FAD(P0L)30AR100001 – The P0L is a Fusion Hybrid FWD -Where to Find Information – when estimating a vehicle with electric technology, refer to -Vehicle maker service information -Emergency response guides (ERGs) -Dismantling guides -* Each of these are available online via the I-CAR Repairability Technical Support (RTS) Portal, i-car.com/RTS. Under the Technical Knowledge banner, select OEM information and then select the vehicle maker of choice -Vehicle Maker Service Information – vehicle maker service information specific to the vehicle model and model year is the best resource for repair information on any vehicle, whether electric or not. All of the information is aimed at the repair technician. Service information includes: -A description and operation of all systems and parts on that specific vehicle -Diagnostic information, procedures for replacing parts, and any special tools and equipment required for the specific vehicle -Up-to-date technical service bulletins that may affect the repair of the vehicle. -Dismantling Guides – another resource from the OEMs is an online dismantling guide, which -Is aimed at the recycling parts industry -Is also free information on some vehicle maker websites – not all vehicle makers have dismantling guides -Includes similar information as ERGs, such as safety precautions, identification information, and HV part locations -Includes additional information such as HV part functions, vehicle operation, and methods for part removal -* Getting the dismantling information up front in the repair process will save the technician valuable time once the repairs have been started. -Approaching a Damaged Electric Vehicle – when approaching an EV or HEV for doing an estimate, general safety considerations include -Be aware that the collision may have comprised HV safety systems and present a potential HV electrical shock hazard -Always assume that parts of the HV circuit are energized even though steps have been taken to disable the system. After a collision, anything is possible -Do not wear metallic objects or jewelry. Do not have metal objects, such as mechanical pencils or tools, in your pockets. A metallic object may fall from a pocket onto an HV part or connection and cause a short circuit -Make sure your skin is not wet and there is no moisture present on or around the vehicle. -Floating System – a high-voltage system is referred to as a floating system, in that with the 12-volt system, the negative terminal of the battery is connected to the chassis, making it a common ground. In an HV system, both terminals of the HV battery are connected directly to the HV parts via the HV cables and connectors. There is no common ground. The ground is floating. -Built-In Safety – electric vehicles are not designed to be HV shock hazards for anyone that opens the hood. There are built-in safety features, such as -Insulation and sheathing on the HV cables. HV current flows through these cables, not through the metal vehicle body -Various onboard sensors that shut off the HV if a problem is detected, such as a collision -For example, some vehicle makers use a passive restraints control unit that uses information from the airbag impact sensors to stop the flow of current from the HV battery in the event of a collision -Warning labels posted wherever there could be a potential for shock -Multiple methods of disabling the HV system -Collision Sensor to Disable High Voltage – some HEVs have a dedicated onboard sensor to automatically disable the HV in a collision. For example, an -HV circuit impact detection sensor to disabled HV whenever there is an airbag deployment -Circuit breaker sensor mounted on the inverter that shuts off the HV in the event of a collision -Thermal sensor on the HV battery to automatically disconnect the battery if the ignition is on and the HV battery exceeds 140 degrees F -HV interlock circuit that disables the HV whenever any HV connector is disconnected -Inertia Switch – some vehicles may have inertia switches that cut off the fuel in a collision. A front switch cuts off both the fuel and the HV in a collision. A rear inertia switch cuts off power to the HV contacts inside the battery case. When the powertrain control module (PCM) senses the loss of power at the contacts, the PCM shuts off power to the fuel pump. Therefore, the rear inertia switch also, indirectly, cuts off power to the fuel pump -Electronic Key – remove electronic keys for electric vehicles and hybrid/electric vehicles, and keep them away from the vehicle. The required distance from the vehicle varies from 4 to 16 feet. If not kept away at the required distance, the vehicle could power up to start without warning and there will not be any noise. Disconnecting the 12-volt battery will also prevent unintentionally starting the vehicle. -Safely Moving the Vehicle – when servicing a damaged HEV or EV, do not push the vehicle with the drive wheels on the ground. Use wheel dollies to move the vehicle without turning the drive wheels. Moving the vehicle with the drive wheels on the ground -May generate electrical energy and charge the condensers in the inverter -Could start a fire if there is damage to an HV cable that shorts it to the vehicle chassis Hybrid Vehicle Identification and Damage Analysis (3/3) Approaching a Damaged Electric Vehicle -High-Voltage Disabling – since the high voltage on an HEV or EV is the primary safety issue, high voltage must be disabled in situations -When collision repairs are done on the vehicle, the HV system must be disabled with the HV battery service disconnect -When damage is being inspected under the hood, the HV can be disabled by turning off the key -If there is an electronic key, keep it a safe distance away -If everything is working properly, this step will confine the HV to the HV battery -* The HV can also be disabled by disconnecting the 12-volt battery, as the high voltage will not power up without the verification from the control module and the control module is powered by the 12-volt battery. Be sure to read any existing DTCs before disconnecting the 12-volt battery. -HV Service Disconnect – the HV service disconnect is used to disable the HV system. The service disconnect -Is located on the HV battery case -Isolates the HV to the HV battery -Has a number of types -The most common type is a slide/flip/pull. With this type, slide the handle from a lock position, flip the handle outward, then pull to remove -It may be a toggle switch -It may be a spring-loaded switch under the battery cover -HV Service Disconnect Fuse – the HV system service disconnect on some HEVs contain a fuse. This HV fuse -Is contained within the body of the service disconnect -Is a replaceable part. For one vehicle maker, the service information states that the standard resistance of the HV fuse should be blow 1 ohm. If it is not, it should be replaced -May be on the negative terminal of the HV battery, help in place by a replaceable, nonconductive (plastic) nut -May not be a service part. On some vehicles, an open HV fuse requires installing a new service disconnect -Will set a DTC if it is blown -HV Service Disconnect Reinstallation – reinstalling the HV service disconnect to enable the HV system is just as critical as removing it. Reinstalling the service disconnect -Requires wearing lineman’s gloves -Must be done properly, or it can set a DTC -Typically requires reversing the steps of the removal procedure -For example, with a slide/flip/pull type of service disconnect, the steps are to insert the service disconnect into the plug, rotate the handle inward, and slide the handle to lock and complete the connection -* Operating the ignition/power switch when the service disconnect is removed or is not properly locked may result in a malfunction or damage to hybrid system electronics. * Not following proper disable and reconnect procedures could result in damage or additional steps, which could cause repair and delivery delays. -Electric Vehicle Features – engine stop/start is a common feature on all HEVs. This feature completely stops the engine when the vehicle comes to a stop and immediately starts the engine when the brake is released. Engine start/stop may need to be bypassed in a repair facility if the engine needs to be running for post-repair inspections. This may not be an issue for some vehicles that keep the vehicle running if the hood is not fully closed. For some vehicles a scan tool may be required to set the vehicle to a maintenance or inspection mode -Regenerative Braking – regenerative braking is a universal feature on electric vehicles. This feature uses the drag of the electric motor to slow the vehicle while generating electricity to help recharge the HV battery. Regenerative braking does not generate enough energy to keep the battery charged on its own, but it does help. This is why an HEV is more efficient in city stop-and-go traffic than in rural areas. -Adding Sound to Electric Vehicles – vehicle makers must add sound to their electric vehicles to alert pedestrians of electric vehicles in motion as of February 13, 2017. Full compliance is required by September 11, 2019. -Other Electric Systems – HV batteries make it possible to power other systems on a vehicle. The two most common are: Electric Air Conditioning (A/C) and Electric Power-Assisted Steering (EPAS) -Electric Air Conditioning – an electric A/C system: -Allows the A/C to keep running when the engine shuts down during idle due to the stop/start system -May have a combination electric/belt-driven compressor that, depending on conditions and the demand on the A/C system, can switch between belt only, electric only, or belt and electric operation -Conductive Compressor Oil – conventional A/C systems that are belt-driven by the engine use polyalkylene glycol (PAG) compressor oil. PAG oil cannot be added to electric A/C systems because PAG oil attracts moisture, which conducts electricity. If sensors within the HV compressor detect a level of electricity being conducted, the entire HV system, and therefore the vehicle itself, will shut down. It the wrong oil is added to a part, that part may require replacement. If the A/C system is charged and operated with the wrong compressor oil, the entire A/C system, including the lines, may require replacement. Adding the wrong oil can happen as easily as the technician using a recovery/recycling/recharging machine for an HEV that was previously used for adding PAG oil to a conventional A/C system. The compressor oil is normally added using an injection feature on the machine, and remnants of PAG oil can remain in the service lines, enough to cause contamination of an HEV system. The only way to prevent this from happening is either by using a dedicated machine or equipment designed to prevent cross-contamination. -Electric A/C Compressor Oil – electric A/C systems require Polyol Ester (POE) oil, which has insulating properties to prevent it from conducting electricity. Not just any POE oil can be used. Some recommended oils include ND-11 and SE-10Y. At least one vehicle maker states that once a container of POE oil has been opened for use, it cannot be stored for late use. This is because it will absorb moisture. It is important to only use OEM-branded compressor oil purchased directly from a local dealership. There is no SAE standards for POE oil for use in electric compressors, so just because a generic bottle of POE oil states that it meets the proper specification does not guarantee it really does meet the specification. It is also important for technicians to pay attention to OEM guidelines for how much compressor oil to use. * Adding to much compressor oil can reduce system efficiency or even result in compressor lock-up -Electric Power-Assisted Steering (EPAS) – electric power-assisted steering (EPAS) on electric vehicles: Uses an electric motor to help turn the steering shaft or gear. Has the motor mounted on the steering column or steering gear - If the motor is mounted internally around the rack, the motor is serviced as part of the rack-and-pinion assembly. May have intermediate voltage capacity (34-46 volts) or 12-volt EPAS. -Cooling Systems – All HEVs and EVs have, at the very least, a system to air-cool the HV battery. HV battery liquid cooling and inverter/converting cooling may also be part of the cooling system. -HV Battery Air-Cooling – the system to air-cool the battery may include a vent fan motor, either inside the battery assembly itself, or separate from the battery, where a cooling fan is mounted just above the HV battery in the trunk area. Air-cooling systems many include vents, for example under the rear seats, on the side panels, and on the package shelf, all aimed at allowing air to flow over the HV battery in a compartment underneath. Air-cooling may be provided using a separate rear A/C unit. The rear A/C is not for passenger comfort. It is only there to help cool the HV battery. The unit switches on automatically when sensors detect the HV battery under the trunk floor is approaching its upper temperature limit. -Inverter/Converter Cooling – HEVs and EVs typically have a cooling system for the combined inverter/converter that: -On HEVs, is separate from an engine cooling system, though typically uses the same type of coolant. It may have a separate radiator, water pump, and coolant reservoir -On HEVs, it may have a radiator integrated with an engine radiator, though there is still a separate water pump and coolant reservoir -Should be inspected after a collision looking for damaged radiator fins, hoses, connections, and coolant leaks. It must be determined whether the source of any coolant leak is the inverter/converter or an engine cooling system. -HV Battery Liquid-Cooling – some HEVs and EVs have a liquid-cooling system for the HV battery. These systems may be maintenance free, being completely contained inside the battery enclosure. This type of cooling system cannot be serviced. It is filled with a 50/50 mix of coolant and water when the battery is originally installed. Replacement of the HV battery is required if there is any damage to the battery cooling system. This type of cooling system has a separate cooling system for the HV battery. These are only serviced at a dealership -Service Notes – when servicing EV or Hybrid vehicles refer to service information for service notes and precautions. Service tasks that may expose the HV battery to high temperatures or involve repairing HV cables are commonly called out in the vehicle maker’s precautions. -Welding Precautions – when welding on an HEV or EV, follow the same precautions as when welding on a conventional vehicle. In addition, there are precautions to take with the high-voltage battery. Some examples of vehicle maker recommendations include -To disable the HV system is welding within 12 inches of the HV battery. Disable the battery by removing the service disconnect -Before cutting or welding near the HV battery, the HV battery must be removed to avoid heat damage -The HV battery must at least be protected with a welding blanket to protect it from sparks whenever welding -HV Battery and the Spraybooth – high temperatures, such as spraybooth bake cycles, can affect the performance and life of HV batteries. There is no harm to a clearcoat integrity in baking at a lower temperature for a longer time. To that end, most paint makers have a clearcoat available that cures quicker at a lower baking temperature -No Cable Repair- no vehicle maker allows repair of high or intermediate voltage cables or connectors. Any damage requires replacement of the cable harness Interior Trim and Convertible Top Damage Analysis (1/2) Module 1 – Interior Trim Interior Trim Overview – this course provides an overview of interior trim pieces, with a focus on damage analysis. The interior trim of a modern vehicle consists of many different types of parts ranging from seating to plastic parts. Although very durable, plastic interior-trim parts may be damaged in a collision. Damage to plastic interior-trim parts may range from small scratches to cracks or even complete breaks in the trim molding. Trim may be made from other materials aside from plastic. For example, from other materials aside from plastic. For example, luxury vehicles often use woodgrain trim to form dash and center console parts -Door and Door-Sill Trim – late model and current vehicle interior door-trim panels are made of a durable plastic and may include- -Courtesy lamps -Speakers -Lock and window controls -Airbag covers -Vents -Power-mirror switches -Note: Inspect door trim and door-sill trim for damage. The severity of damage may vary from light scratches to cracks and breaks, repair options for door and sill trim may be limited due to the difficulty of matching texture and leaving a visible repair. Repairs should not be made in the location of safety systems such as airbags. It is common to replace damaged door-trim panels and sill-trim panels -Pillar Trim – inspect the pillar trim for damage. Repair options may be limited. Most pillar trim is located near airbags and might be easily damaged during an airbag deployment. Verify that the attachment methods are undamaged. Some attachment methods may use one-time-use fasteners or clips and can impact repair vs. replace decisions. Pillar trim is commonly replaced, if damaged -Trunk and Rear Hatch Trim – collision damage may cause items in trunk to shift or move, causing damage to the rear hatch and trunk trim. Inspect for cracks, tears, and misalignment, as well as staining. Batteries located in the trunk that sustain damage from a collision may cause battery acid to spill onto interior trim panels. This could cause staining or deterioration of the panel trim. Trim that may have moved as a result of a collision may affect operation of closure panels. It may be necessary to remove items from the trunk to allow for better inspection of the trim panels. Typically, items that sustain damage are replaced -Sunroof Trim – inspect the sunroof trim for damage. Removal and replacement is common when the sunroof trim is damaged. Consult OEM repair manuals to determine if repairs might be possible -Woodgrain Trim – modern woodgrain trim may have a top layer that is only a few milimeters thick. Under this thin veneer, there are typically two layers of a more durable wood. Following a collision, this trim should be inspected for scratches, cracks, chips, and for other damage that may cause the thin veneer to lift or lose adhesion to the other layers of wood. Because repair options are often limited, damaged woodgrain-trim items are typically replaced -Seat Cover – seat covers require inspection for damage following a collision or a loss. Seats equipped with airbags will usually require replacement following a deployment. Seat covers are designed using a special fabric and thread and cant be replaced separately. Some stains may be removed with the appropriate cleaners; however, some stains may require seat cover replacements. OEM service information may further explain the limits of repairs that can be made to seat covers -Interior Lamps – when analyzing damage to the interior lamps, verify the proper operation. This is done by either manually operating the switch or by opening closure panels that have switches integrated into the latch mechanisms. If the interior lighting is inoperable, verify that this isn’t simply a burnt-out bulb or blown fuse. If these pass visual inspection, you may need to account for some diagnostic time to further determine the cause. Some vehicles have fiber-optic lighting, which is generally replaced, if damaged -Privacy Covers – items stored in the rear of the vehicle may damage the privacy cover during a collision. Inspect privacy covers for tears, scratches, and deformation. This type of damage usually requires the privacy cover to be replaced. Check that the privacy cover performs as designed. If inspecting a retractable privacy cover, verify that the retracting mechanism is operational -Carpet – inspect the interior trim for any damage or staining. Repairs to the carpet may be possible. Check the service information for any repair guidelines, as well as cleaning guidelines. Light stains, such as coffee or soft drinks, can be removed with stain removal products. Severe damage, such as tears or burns, may not be serviceable and may lead to replacement -Center Console/Center Stack – when inspecting the center console or center stack, check for any: -Scratches -Chips -Gouges -Breaks -Deformation -Note: Center stacks and center consoles may be made of textured plastic or painted plastic surfaces, which may be hard to replicate during the repair process. Replacement is likely when damage is severe. Consult the OEM service information for repair options. Also, inspect the gear selector for damage and proper operation -Visors, Headliners, and Overhead Consoles – verify proper operation of the visors through their full range of motion. Damage to headliners typically requires replacement because the construction materials limit repair options. Overhead consoles are typically made of plastic and may be textured, which limits repair options. -Dash, Instrument Panel, Glove Box, and Knee Bolster – the dash panel, instrument panel, glove box, and knee bolster are all areas that require inspection following a collision. Inspect for proper operation of the gauges and lights on the instrument panel. Check for normal operation of the glove box. Abnormal movement may indicate a misalignment. Construction materials, as well as textures, may limit repair options. Note: Check the OEM repair manual for any repair options for the dash, instrument panel, glove box, and the knee bolster -Interior Vents – interior vents are placed in many different locations around the vehicle. Verify that the airflow-direction adjusters are still operational. It may be necessary to run the vehicle and turn on the HVAC system for testing purposes. Look at the OEM repair information to verify if there are any repair options, but most likely broken vents will require replacement -Speakers, Audio, and Audio-Visual – audio and audio-visual systems may be mounted in the center stack and other locations throughout the vehicle interior. Following a collision, check for proper operation of all audio and audio-visual components. Damage to the infotainment system screen will likely require replacement. Speakers that sustain damage from a collision will likely be replaced. -Part Replacement Considerations – following a collision, some interior trim items may be repairable depending on the amount of trim damage and whether the parts are made up of repairable materials. Replacement considerations also include the cost and availability of the interior trim parts. In some cases, trim replacements may not be available as a serviceable part, but may be available as an assembly. For example, damage to woodgrain trim requiring replacement will likely only be available as part of the door-panel-trim assembly Interior Trim and Convertible Top Damage Analysis (2/2) Module 2 – Convertible Top -Types of Convertible Tops – a soft-top roof is made of fabric. Soft-top roofs may be deisnged to raise and lower manually or electronically through the use of either hydraulics or electric motors. When closing the roof, latching mechanisms may be used to secure the soft-top frame just above the windshield. Other types of convertible tops include hardtop, targa, and T-top -Hardtops – hardtop convertibles are more durable than soft-top roofs and commonly feature an automatically operated, multi-link, retractable, self-storing roof. Instead of using fabric, hardtops are commonly constructed of metal. Non-retractable hardtops may feature manual latches to allow the roof to be lifted off and removed from the vehicle -Targa and T-Tops – a targa top is a semi-convertible body style with a removable-roof section. These tops differ from T-tops, which have a solid, non-removable T-bar centered between the top of the windshield and the rear roll bar. Targa tops are repaired like other exterior body panels. Refer to OEM service information for specific repair information. T-tops generally have two separate roof panels located above the seats that fit between the windshield and the central T-bar. Repair options may be limited with T-tops. Typically, the glass sections on a T-top are replaced when damaged -Parts of Convertible Tops – soft-top, convertible-top parts commonly include the: -Top and window -Frame and bows -Pivot brackets -Side rails and tension cables -Retainers -Seals and weatherstripping -Note: Soft-top, convertible roofs may be constructed from multiple layers of textile material to provide sound dampening and insulation. Some soft-top roofs may feature vinyl rear windows. The soft top shown here features a rear window with heated glass -Frame and Bows – a typical four-bow, convertible frame may include: -A tack rail -Diagonal or vertical frame members -Side members -Bows that span over the passenger compartment when the top is raised. The bow that latches at the front of the vehicle may be referred to as the header bow or top header -Pivot Brackets, Side Rails, and Cables – the pivot-bracket mechanism allows the frame to fold at the diagonal or vertical frame member. Side rails attach to the top of the pivot bracket to support the roof bows. Frame members may be supported and guided by tension cables. In addition to tension cables, tops may be held to the folding top frame, along the side members, with special cables that are referred to as hold-down cables -Retainers – reinforcements are necessary when attaching the fabric to the convertible frame. The headliner lines the inside of the roof, under the outer edges of the soft top fabric. Headlining provides a sturdy edge reinforcement. The fabric and headliner then fasten to the convertible frame at the top header and at other key frame areas with the support of the retainer strips. These strips may be fastened to the convertible frame with rivets or with other fasteners -Seals and Weatherstripping – convertibles rely on seals and weatherstripping to insulate the passenger compartment and prevent leaks. Seals are commonly not part of the top itself but instead are attached to the folding framework. If a seal is a permanent part of the top, then it is commonly manufactured into the replacement top -Other Common Parts- convertibles may feature manual top or automatic latches located on the header bow to secure the top. Automatic latch assemblies may include lock motors and drive mechanisms. These latches typically have limited repair options. Sensors monitor the operation of parts, such as the: -Convertible top -Side windows -Tonneau cover -Latches -Note: Tops may not operate if the sensors signal a fault to the movable-top, control module. When a top fails to open or close, a scan tool may be required to determine the location of the fault -Hidden vs. Visible Retracted Tops – modern sport vehicles may feature hidden, retractable hardtops with complex systems for tucking the folded roof neatly behind the rear seat. Vehicle makers have many designs for hiding retracted tops. Some vehicles feature flat panels that slide over the retracted roof, so that a cover panel locks in flush with the trunk lid. With less exposure, hidden retracted tops often sustain less wear and damage than visible retracted tops -Hydraulic vs. Motorized Systems – hydraulic systems include a hydraulic pump assembly and hydraulic lines. Where motorized systems use an electric motor and cables, hydraulic systems energize solenoids and supply pressure to the hydraulic-pump cylinders to raise and lower the top. Both systems should be tested for full range of operation and alignment. If the top does not open or close for a hydraulic system, check for leaks in the hydraulic lines and for leaks at the pump. Note: Verify communication between sensors and modules before checking for hydraulic leaks -Common Types of Damage – - Top fabric may be damaged by mold and mildew, which requires the application of cleaners. Check OEM documentation for cleaning recommendations. Fabric damage may also include: -Rips -Tears -Punctures -Burn marks -Staining -This type of fabric damage typically warrants replacement of the soft-top fabric. Other common types of damage may include: -Frame damage -Leaks -Faulty latch mechanisms -System Inspection – if the top is not moving, whether open or closed, check the open/close switch to verify it is set to automatic. Also, check that the sensors and fuses associated with the roof are in working order. Commonly, a scan tool may be used to verify the operation of convertible sensors -Frame Damage and Leaks – check the frame hinges, side members, and bows for bends, breaks, or improper alignment. Leaks may be caused due to damaged seals and weatherstripping, misalignment, and fabric damage -Faulty Latch Mechanisms – faulty latch mechanisms may affect whether or not the removable top will lock down above the passenger area. Latching mechanisms may fail due to severe collision damage that bends or breaks the latch mechanical components. For an electronically actuated latch mechanism, check for damage to wiring harnesses or other convertible-top sensors -Repairing Damaged Hardtops – depending upon the severity of the damage, some hardtops may be repairable. Minor damage can often be repaired much like other exterior panels on the vehicle. Verify the OEM repair procedures for the damaged hardtop components -Complete Replacement Considerations – severe top and frame damage may warrant a complete top replacement. Frame-alignment issues may include top-latch mechanisms that do not line up or tops that do not correctly fold. Frame replacement may be required if there are no adjustments that resolve these misalignments. Initializations program vehicle systems to learn the full range-of-motion for a newly installed top. Vehicles must be independently assessed to determine what initializations are necessary. Depending on OEM specifications, a scan tool may be required to perform these processes Introduction to Electric Vehicles (1/2) Introduction to electric vehicles -Future of Transportation – electric vehicles are no longer thought of as the future of transportation. The future of transportation is here, now. Today, there are over 1 million electric vehicles operating on the roads of the United States. Globally, that number jumps to almost 5 million. Those numbers are projected to continue to grow each year. Due to tremendous battery technology advancements and the increased reliability and range, the electric vehicle is becoming a more viable transportation solution. For comparison, in 2011, there were only nine different models of EVs available. As of 2020, there are approximately 43 models from a variety of different vehicle makers -Are You Seeing More EVs Today? – with the transition to EVs fully underway, a new report released by the Edison Electric Institute (EEI) and the Institute for Electric Innovation (IEI), Electric Vehicle Sales and the Charging Infrastructure Required through 2030, projects that U.S. EV sales will exceed 3.5 million vehicles in 2030. That will be more than 20 percent of all annual vehicle sales. With the rise in the number of EVs on the road, the collision repair industry must prepare for electric vehicles being a higher percentage of their business -Types of Electric Vehicles -Hybrid Electric Vehicle (HEV) – HEVs are powered by both gasoline/diesel and electricity. The electric energy is produced by the vehicle’s on-board generator and regenerative braking system. Regenerative braking uses an electric vehicles motor as a generator to convert much of the kinetic energy lost when decelerating back into stored energy in the vehicles battery. Mild hybrids always rely on an internal combustion engine (ICE). A single electric motor assist with acceleration and some regenerative braking. Full hybrids typically have greater electric propulsion capabilities compared to mild hybrids. They typically start off using the electric motor. Then, as the load or speed rises, the engine will kick in. both motors are controlled by an internal computer to ensure the greatest economy for the driving conditions. Visual indicators are – Combustion engine, fuel door, exhaust pipe, badging and labels -Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV)- PHEVs are powered by both an ICE and electricity. The difference between HEVs and PHEVs is that PHEVs can recharge the battery by an on-board generator, regenerative braking, and an electric charging port. Typically, the HV battery will be larger. Depending on the manufacturer, the PHEVs can differ based on the primary energy source. Some PHEVs favor the fuel as their primary energy source where others rely on the electricity. Visual indictors are – Combustion engine, fuel door, exhaust pipe, charging port, badging and labels -Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV) – BEVs are fully electric vehicles. These vehicles do not have an ICE, fuel system, or exhaust system. They are only powered by the electricity stored in the high-voltage battery system. BEVs must use an external charging station or cable to an AC outlet to charge the battery. A regenerative braking system is typically part of their operational strategy as well. Visual indicators are – Charging port, badging and labels -EV Systems – regardless of the make, model, or year of the electric vehicle, all electric vehicles contain some type of energy storage, control, and propulsion system -Energy Storage System – -High-Voltage Battery – the HV battery provides all of the electricity needed for the vehicle propulsion and other on-board systems. These batteries are typically lithium-ion batteries and are rechargeable. Lithium-ion batteries are known to have a high energy density for their weight and are able to retain their charge when not being used. The HV battery will produce a large amount of heat when the vehicle is operating. Thermal management requires that the battery cells be kept within a specific temperature range. This is accomplished by internal cooling of the battery. In most cases, the HV battery pack is engineered and designed to work with the vehicle structure to manage collision energy. -Low-Voltage Battery – the low-voltage battery system powers the vehicle electronics, control modules, and some accessories. The low-voltage battery provides power to the health and monitor functions of the high-voltage battery system. The charge is typically maintained by the HV battery and on-bard DC/DC converter. Depending on the make, model, or year of vehicle, the battery may be placed in different locations -Charging Port – the charging port allows the vehicle to connect to an external power supply in order to charge the high-voltage battery pack. Charging connections come in different types depending on the vehicle. The charging cable usually has an interlock to the charge port when the vehicle is actively charging. This is a two-step process involved an electrical and mechanical cable locking and release mechanism. When the charging cord is plugged into the vehicle, there is a validation, or handshake, between the external charging system and the vehicle system. This ensures a safe electrical connection and conditions before charging begins -On-Board Charger – the on-board charger takes the incoming AC from the charging port and converts it to DC power for charging the HV battery. It monitors battery characteristics such as voltage, current, temperature, and state of charge while charging the HV battery. Similar to many of the parts found on an EV, the on-board charger is in different locations based on the vehicle maker design. -Control System – -Power Electronics Controller – the power electronics controller manages the flow of electricity between the HV battery and the electric motor. Alternating current (AC) is electric current that continuously changes direction, like power from the electric company. Direct current (DC) is power that only flows in one direction. Batteries store and supply DC power. Controllers may be a separate part or built onto the motor. The HV battery stores and produces DC power. The power electronics controller changes it to AC power to permit smooth, efficient control of the drive motor speed and torque. During regenerative braking, the drive motor generates AC power. This is converted to DC and sent to the HV battery. Power electronics controllers may be called a: Propulsion motor controller, Inverter/Converter -DC/DC Converter – the HV battery supplies several hundred volts of DC used for the high-voltage systems. The other electric systems in the vehicle typically run on much lower voltage requirements. The DC/DC converter changes the higher-voltage DC power from the HV battery to the low-voltage DC power needed to run the vehicle accessories and recharge the low-voltage battery. Some have intermediate voltages of 36-48 volts for electric power steering and other systems -Cooling – the cooling system maintains a proper operating temperature range of the HV battery pack, electric motor, power electronics, and other EV parts. The most common battery cooling method circulates a water-based coolant through cooling passages within the battery structure. The A/C system may use a chiller, a refrigerant-to-coolant heat exchanger to remove heat from the coolant, thus removing heat from that system. Some vehicle makers may use air cooling to manage the battery temperature -Propulsion System – -Electric Motor – using energy from the HV battery, the electric motor drives the vehicle wheels. Electric motors perform both the drive and regeneration functions. In an electric car, there is no alternator. The motor in an electric car acts as both the motor and an alternator. That’s one of the reasons why electric cars are so unique. When your foot is on the accelerator, energy from the battery is used to power the motor, which supplies torque to the gears, which rotate the tires. When your foot comes off the accelerator, the motor turns into an alternator, and this energy may be used to help recharge the battery. Electric motors are capable of very high torque output at startup and across a wide rpm range -Transmission or Gearbox – the transmission transfers mechanical power from the electric motor to the drive wheels. Electric vehicles don’t have multi-speed gearboxes like an Ice vehicle does. Instead, they only need a single gear. This is because the electric motor does not operate in a limited rpm band typical of internal combustion engines. Electric motors have a much higher rpm capability compared to the ICE. Designers of EV can decide on a gear ratio that provides a good range between acceleration and top speed and use a single-gear ratio. There isn’t a need for a reverse gear. This function is handled electronically by reversing the direction rotation of the motor -Other EV Systems – PTC – all battery chemistry slows at lower temperatures reducing power capacity, lithium-ion batteries included. Batteries may need to be heated in colder temperatures. Vehicle makers typically use positive temperature coefficient (PTC) heaters to warm the coolant of the HV battery when its cold. Additionally, BEVs don’t have a conventional, internal combustion engine, cabin-heating system. They rely on PTC heaters to provide cabin heating. Air-cooled HV batteries have internal-heating elements to warm the battery modules -Other EV Systems – Electric Power Steering – electric power steering is very common on todays vehicles, including electric vehicles. Electric power steering replaces the need for hydraulic pumps, reservoirs, and fluid lines with electric motors. Sensors are used to detect the position and torque of the steering input from the column. A computer module controls the amount of torque applied based on the driving conditions. Other electric driven systems include the air conditioning compressor which operates using power from the high-voltage system -EV Instrument MILs – malfunction indicator lamps (MILs) don’t always provide a complete understanding of the vehicles health. Although, MILs do offer a great start in identifying possible faults. With an EV, there are a number of unique Mils that have been created. Each of the indicators can be vehicle-maker specific. There are common indicators that most EVs will display. These include ready, charging, battery warning, and service warning indicators -Ready Indicators – these indicators effectively inform a driver when an electric vehicle is ready to move. This is a replacement, of sorts, for the sound of a running gasoline engine. When the ready indicator is illuminated, normal driving is possible. Indicators related to vehicle movement include the park brake light and the Park/Fwd/Rev icons -Charging Indicators – these charging symbols display while the battery is being charged. Different colors provide further indication of the charge status. Oftentimes, the indicator displays when charging and then turns off when the battery is fully charged. Additional charging status indication and displays may be provided as well -Battery Warning Indicators – battery warning symbols indicate that there is a problem with the battery or that the battery will not take a charge. The entire propulsion system may be shut down. The vehicle should be evaluated by a qualified technician at a service shop. -Service Warning Indicators – these are some examples of EV power system warning indicators. For some EVs, these are the equivalent of a check engine light found on some combustion engine vehicles. These symbols may indicator a possible problem with some of the following EV systems: -Electric motor -Inverter system -Charging system -HV battery -Cooling system -Similar to a check engine light, this indicator does not provide a detail of what is wrong, only that something is wrong, and service is required -Other Indicators – there may be other indications of possible EV failures besides those shown on the instrument display. It’s a good practice to look, but don’t touch, for obvious damage that may have compromised the cooling system, high-voltage system wiring, connectors, modules, high-voltage battery, or other parts. Other indicators may include: -Smoke -Leaking fluids -Odd noises -Smells -If there is any doubt on the integrity of the HV system, battery, or cooling systems, the vehicle needs to be evaluated by a qualified HV service specialist -EV Charging Stations – when performing collision repair to an electric vehicle, the vehicle may need to have high-voltage battery charged. There are different power ratings, connector types, and cabling requirements based on the specific EV. Most vehicles come with a charging cable; however, the owner may not keep it in the vehicle. You may have to ask the customer to provide it, if you do not have one on hand. Charging times will vary depending on the state of charge, battery capacity, temperature, and other conditions. There are 3 different levels of charging: -Level 1 is slow charging using a 120 volt circuit. Typically, the charging time is 17-24 hours or more -Level 2 is fast charging using a 240 volt circuit. The charging time is between 4-5 hours or more -Level 3 is rapid charging using a higher-voltage DC circuit. Charging times can be as low as 30 minutes -Its important to have an understanding of how to connect, what the charge indicators mean, and how to disconnect the charging system by reviewing the owners manual -Embrace the Trend – the era of the electric vehicle is here today. More and more vehicle makers are producing different variants of EV. Within the collision repair industry, we need to embrace this trend and be prepared for it. Understanding the differences between an EV and an ICE vehicle is a good place to start. But its only a start. Each vehicle maker has specific guidelines, policies, and procedures that must be followed when working safely around EV. Ensure that you are aware of these Test – 1 – the high-voltage battery is typically what type of battery – lithium-ion 2- when this light is illuminated what does it indicate – the vehicle is able to move 3- of the three types of electric vehicles, the battery electric vehicle has the smallest high-voltage battery system – true – x wrong 4- the on-board charger converts AC power from the charging power to DC power for charging the HV battery – true 5- which part converts the high-voltage DC power from the HV battery to the low-voltage DC power – DC/DC converter Introduction to Squeeze-Type Resistance Spot Welding (1/4) Module 1 – STRSW Process -STRSW Beginnings – vehicle makers have been using STRSW on the assembly line for many decades and recommend this type of welding for a variety of applications -STRSW Process Recommended – STRSW is the method called for by most vehicle makers for collision repair. This is due to improvement in equipment. STRSW allows technicians to make welds that are as strong as the original welds. Vehicle makers recommend this type of welding due to the minimal heat-affect zone. STRSW reduces the concern when welding on advanced high-strength steels that are sensitive to heat. These steels are being used more in vehicle construction. Low heat-affect also allows preservation of most of the existing corrosion protection -STRSW Application – STRSW is not just the specification for exterior body panels. This type of welding may also be specified on some structural applications such as pillars, rocker panels, and rail flanges. Before using the machine on a vehicle, it is critical that test welds are made and destructively tested. This is done using the same type and thickness material, with the same coatings that will be welded on the vehicle. STRSW is not specified on aluminum during collision repair. Because of the lower resistance in aluminum and high-heat transfer characteristics, spot welding aluminum requires much higher levels of current than steel. Even with the onset of inverter technology in STRSW repair equipment, these high-power requirements may not be met -Process Characteristics – the STRSW process is the main OEM welding method. Repair welds can be made to look just like original welds. Original construction can be duplicated in the field with less chance of error compared to other welding methods. With STRSW, there is minimal sparking. Though there is some sparking with some welds, there is much less sparking than with other welding processes. Vehicle and personal protection are still required. STRSW requires less preparation in some instances. For example, there is no need for drilling holes in replacement panels, such as when making gas metal arc (GMA) plug welds. No filler metal is required. It is unnecessary to dress the weld in most applications -Personal Safety – personal safety equipment that should be worn includes safety glasses with side shields or a full-face mask. A filtered lens is not required. Always wear leather gloves. Remove all flammable materials before welding. Always follow STRSW equipment maker’s specific safety guidelines. Do not operate or place the welder near water or in wet locations. Do not place the welder on unstable or uneven ground. Unplug the welder from the wall outlet before servicing, cleaning, or maintenance -STRSW Setup – STRSW requires access to both sides of the panel. Vehicle makers may specify a maximum combined panel stack thickness. Different configurations of arm sets and electrode tips may be needed for different areas of the vehicle. Seam welds are not done with the STRSW process. Where a seam weld is required, such as many sectioning joints, a GMA welder is usually required -STRSW Stages – STRSW is a pressure-welding process. A spot weld is made in three stages, including: -Squeeze time -Current-on time (or weld time) -Hold time -Note: The squeeze time stage occurs when the electrode tips close against the panels to be welded. The current-on time stage occurs when the current is turned on, lasting for a specified time. The hold time stage occurs after the current is turned off, allowing the weld to solidify. STRSW machines may have pre-programmed or automatic settings. Some welding machines allow some or all of these stages to be fine-tuned in a manual setting Introduction to Three-Dimensional (3-D) Measuring (1/3) Principles of Measuring -Why do we Measure Vehicles? – measuring the vehicle structure helps identify the full extent of damage and find hidden damage during the estimating/blueprinting process. It is also used to: -Develop a repair plan -Monitor repair progress -Provide documentation -Note: measuring helps to ensure a smooth repair process, with reduced supplements and/or internal turnbacks. If measuring is not performed the likelihood of encountering problems later in the repair increases. For example, the repair may seem complete, but when the bolt-on panels are installed, the do not close properly. This indicates that the vehicle was not properly straightened during repaired -Measuring – measuring provides direction during the structural straightening process. It shows where specific vehicle points are currently located and where those points need to be for the vehicle to be repaired properly. It also helps to make sure the vehicle is not overpulled and additional damage is not created. Measuring also provides documentation that straightening was performed to the vehicle-maker specifications. This can be used to show both insurers and customers that the work was performed. Finally, measuring helps to restore the vehicle structure so safety systems operate properly. Sensor operation, such as airbag sensors and the advanced driver assistance system (ADAS), rely on a structure that is restored to specification -When Should we Measure? – one of the primary questions asked is, “When do I measure?” vehicles should be measured when: -There is suspected structural misalignment, meaning the body lines are off -They have been in light, moderate, or severe collisions -There is a restraint system deployment -A wheel is out of position -Type of Damage – when examining outer body panels, determine if a dent or deformation is related to a direct impact, indirect impact, or inertial damage. If it is indirect damage, it is an indication of a structural issue that should be examined further. Some recommendations exist that state every vehicle should be measured. However, this may not be necessary if the damage is limited to the outer panel only. But if there is any doubt, measure the vehicle. This will help improve key performance indicators (KPIs) during the repair process -Why Measure for Damage Analysis? – measuring can be done for damage analysis, as well as during collision repair. This type of measuring can indicate if there are structural issues that need to be repaired and further measuring needs to take place. Measuring helps determine if there is any hidden, secondary, or pre-existing damage that needs to be accounted for on an estimate and helps determine a repair plan. If the system is computerized, it can provide documentation of structural damage and can be attached to the estimate and/or provided to the insurer, if necessary -Damage Analysis Measuring Equipment – measuring equipment for damage analysis must be easy to set up, portable, quick to use, and generally should not mounting a vehicle to a bench. Measuring can be done from a lift or while on the ground, resting on its suspension. Several examples of measuring equipment are shown here -Where to Find Measurements – before any measuring can begin, vehicle-specific dimensions are required. These are available from: -Vehicle makers -Measuring equipment makes, often supplied with their measuring equipment -Information providers, such as ALLDATA, Mitchell, CCC, etc -Vehicle-Maker Measurements – vehicle-maker measurements often include both point-to-pint and three-dimensional measurements. Measurements are provided online at the vehicle-makers websites -Measuring Sheets – measuring sheets may be supplied by the equipment makers or information providers -Equipment Makers – equipment makers provide complete specification that can be accessed for each vehicle. The measuring information typically comes from: -Vehicle makers, which may include computer-aided design (CAD) drawings -Measurements from new vehicles using their own equipment. Generally, measurements are taken away from only one new vehicle, rather than multiple vehicles -Data from other information providers (such as Mitchell, ALLDATA, etc) -Information Providers – information providers, such as Mitchell, CCC, and ALLDATA, are also good sources for vehicle measurements. The majority of their numbers are provided by the vehicle makers. The graphic shown here is from ALLDATA -Additional Sources – there may be times when there are no measurements available from any of the previous sources. This may be because the vehicle is too new or the measurement required is not listed on any of the data sheets. If this is the case, comparative measurements can be taken from one side of the vehicle to the other, assuming the measurements are symmetrical, or from an undamaged vehicle of the same model and year -Symmetrical Measurements – symmetrical measurements are the same on each side of the vehicle. For example, a door opening on the driver side has the exact dimensions as a door opening on the passenger side -Asymmetrical Measurements – asymmetrical vehicles have different measurements from side-to-side or changes in the vehicle structure that can cause variations in measurements from side-to-side. Asymmetrical measurements may be caused by reference points that are in different locations. As shown in this example, some vehicles may have strut tower bolts in different positions. Since the strut tower bolts are reference points, the measurements may be different, even though there is no structure variation between the left and right side of the vehicle. It is important to identify asymmetrical measurements when making comparative measurements. The measurements may appear off, but that may be by design -Tolerance – tolerance is the amount of variation in vehicle dimensions from vehicle-to-vehicle that is considered to be within specification. Maintaining tolerance ensure that when vehicles are assembled, all parts fit properly, such as closure panels (i.e. doors, hoods) suspension parts, and drivetrain parts. Measuring systems can be set so that measurements that are not within tolerance are displayed in different colors. In this example, out-of-tolerance measurements are displayed in red -Tolerance Example – without tolerances, there will be too much variation which in turn leads to a product that does not function as designed. For example, consider a table with parts (legs, table top, fasteners, etc.) that are manufactured at different sites and then assembled at another site. If the parts are not built within a specific tolerance, there will be an issue at the assembly plant. Most likely, parts will not line up and the table will be difficult to assemble or not look correct when assembly is complete. -Build Tolerance – build tolerance is the allowable variation in specific measurements during vehicle construction at the assembly plant. Build tolerance can vary, depending on the assembly line, and can vary from vehicle-to-vehicle of the same make and model and still be within specification. For some vehicle makers, this can be less than one millimeter, for others it may be more -Build Tolerance: Vehicle-to-Vehicle – variations in build tolerance can differ even between the same make and model. This may be due to vehicles being assembled on different manufacturing jigs in different vehicle assembly plants and can be caused by variations from part suppliers. The vast majority of vehicle makers do not provide a tolerance number, they only provide specifications. Build tolerances can vary from year-to-year for the same vehicle make and model -Vehicle Repair Tolerance – repair tolerance is used during straightening process to determine the specific location of a measuring point. The repair tolerance varies between vehicle makers. For example, some North American vehicles may have a little more tolerance compared to some European or Asian vehicles. Previously, 3 or 5 mm tolerances were typically acceptable on older model vehicles. However, this recommendation is not as common with late model vehicle design. Today, vehicle structures overall have a tighter tolerance regardless of the vehicle maker -Tolerance on Different Parts of a Vehicle – some parts of the vehicle have tighter tolerances than others. These may include: -Sensor mounting locations (airbag sensors, lane change sensors, adaptive cruise control sensors -Suspension mounting locations -Door openings, hinges, and strikers Introduction to Three-Dimensional (3-D) Measuring (2/3) Identifying Damage Conditions -Measuring Types – there are two types of measuring: -Point-to-Point measuring is a simple measurement of distance between two points -Three-dimensional measuring is a measurement that determines the location of a point using length, height, and width -Point-to-Point Measurements – point-to-point measurements are made from center-to-center or edge-to-edge of a set of reference points and are often used as a quick check during the damage analysis process. They may be used to verify a three-dimensional measurement, or as a quick check during vehicle repair. Point-to-point measurements are not considered a reliable method for measuring a vehicle. A point-to-point measurement only measures the distance between point A and point B. this measurement cannot be used to reliably determine if a point on a vehicle is at the right height, length, or width specification. In many situations, assumptions are being made as to the integrity of the point-to-point measurements -Point-to-Point Measuring Tools – the most common tools used for point-to-point measurements include a tape measure and a tram gauge or tram bar. Measurements should be documented for vehicle estimates and repairs. Tape measures and most tram bars provide limited capability to generate a measuring report and therefore require manual recording of measurements. Tram bars may tie into a three-dimensional electronic measuring system and allow recording of measurements. Additionally, three-dimensional electronic equipment can provide point-to-point measurements -Tape Measure – some measuring tapes have a T-hook to keep the end in place while measuring. The tape measure should lie flat between points for the most accurate reading -Tram Gauge/Tram Bar – tram gauges are available in different sizes and have adjustable tips. The adjustable tips allow you to extend the points of the gauge so measurements can be made around protruding objects, such as exhaust systems. Tram gauges may either have either measuring scales built-in or digital displays and typically have tips that fit various-sized reference holes. If pointers are set at different heights to avoid an obstruction, the measurement on the tram gauge does not reflect the true measurement between the pointers. A tape measure should be used to measure between the tips of the tram gauge extensions -Point-to-Point Measuring – point-to-point measuring is often used for checking that a section of the vehicle is square. This requires making a diagonal measurement from one side of the vehicle to the other. Point-to-point measuring is used for checking the under hood area and the under body area in the front, center, or rear sections. When checking if portions of the vehicle are square, this technique can provide correct measurements even if the structure is out of alignment. This why other dimensions must be referenced during point-to-point measuring. Making length and width measurements can help verify that a section is symmetrical -Why Three-Dimensional Measuring is Necessary – the width (centerline plane), length (zero plane), and height (datum plane) each represent one dimension that, when combined, are used to locate a specific point. Three-dimensional measuring is the only way to determine if the length, width, and height are within specification. It is also the only way to determine if the vehicle points are in the proper position relative to other points on the vehicle -Datum Measurements – in some instances, tram gauge pointers may be set at different heights to make datum measurements. This type of measurement generally does not provide accurate results, because it is difficult to determine if the gauge is exactly parallel to the datum plane. Not holding the bar parallel to the datum plane may cause the measurement to be longer or shorter than specification -Definition – the three-section principle divides the vehicle into three sections -Front includes the under hood and underbody areas forward of the cowl -Center includes the passenger compartment -Rear includes the deck lid opening, rear body panel, trunk floor, and rear rails -Center Section – the center section is located beneath the passenger compartment area between the front and rear wheelhouses. The center section is the foundation of measuring and is generally measured first. Three undamaged measuring points are required to establish a foundation for measuring. If the center section is undamaged, it provides a reference for all other measurements -Torque Box – torque boxes were parts of a full frame where weak portions of the frame were boxed in to add strength. These were typically where the front of the frame connected to the center, and the center of the frame connected to the rear. With the advancement of vehicle design and construction, the torque box is not all that common and therefore, can be confusing to some technicians. Now, the torque box is more of a description of a location on a vehicle, not so much referring to a specific part on a vehicle Introduction to Three-Dimensional Measuring (3/3) Measuring the Vehicle -Vehicle-Maker Measuring Sheets – measuring sheets from the vehicle maker often have specific symbols, icons, and other identifiers to help technicians locate specific measuring points. Icons are used to indicate if the measurements are point-to-point or three-dimensional. They may also be used to describe which side of the vehicle is being refenced. For example, Toyota uses upper and lowercase letters to identify the left and right side of the vehicle. In the example shown here, letters are used to identify measuring locations. Additionally, the vehicle-maker measuring sheets will have specific instructions, such as how to identify symmetrical measurements and how to identify the length, width, and height measuring points -Measuring Sheet Information Introduction – there is other information available on the measuring sheet -Loaded vs Unloaded Measurements and Movable Parts – a loaded measurement is made when the vehicle is resting on the suspension. An unloaded measurement is when the vehicle is lifted in the air, off the suspension. There may also be different measurements based on whether or not the engine is in or out of the vehicle, since the weight of the engine can affect height measurements in the front. However, this is becoming less of an issues since higher-strength steels are used in the construction of the structure. Measurements for movable parts include such things as suspension parts, for example, ball joints -Underbody and Under Hood Measurements – upper body measurements often include under hood, pillars, door openings, the deck lid opening, or windshield and back glass openings -Reading Vehicle-Maker Measuring Sheets – when reading vehicle-maker measuring sheets, keep in mind: -The locations of the zero plane and datum plane are provided in the manual. It is written as a specific distance and point. For example, the datum plane may be listed as 300 mm below the rocker panel, lower flange edge -Reference points may also be identified by a letter on a vehicle diagram that corresponds to a letter and measurements listed in a chart -The three-dimensional measurements are taken from the datum, zero, and centerline planes -Note: This measuring sheet shows the zero plane location in the rear torque box area -Selecting the Correct Data Sheet- it is important to select the correct data sheet when measuring a vehicle. While this may seem obvious, selecting an incorrect vehicle data sheet is a common error when setting up a measuring system. Mistakes include choosing the wrong make/model/year or the wrong cab style of box length (for example, extended cab vs crew cab). Some systems may also require entering the two-wheel or four-wheel drive option -Setting Up Measurements – after setting up the base measurements or center section, if the measurements do not make sense when compared to the damage, check the vehicle make, model, and year. Ensure that the vehicle matches what is being used by the measuring system to track the measurements. This includes making sure the points being measured on the vehicle are the correct ones. The measuring system uses what you enter. If a location to measure is chosen within the measuring system and the technician measures an incorrect data point on the vehicle, the measuring software will take that input as the point, even if it is incorrect. -Establishing Base Measurements – one of the first tasks in measuring is to establish base measurements. For electronic measuring systems, base measurements are specific points that all other measurements will be based on when working. Base measurements require at least three good points to ensure an electronic measuring system can establish length, height, and width. You must choose locations where there is high confidence that the points are in the correct locations. Typically, base measurements are made in the center section of the vehicle, generally in the four farthest corners. -Establishing Base Measurements (cont’d) – the center section is chosen because those points typically do not move during the straightening process. Think of the center section as being similar to the foundation of a home. The vehicle is built around the center section. If the base-measurement locations are incorrect, they will affect all other measurements and the vehicle will not be measured properly. Note that with most systems, the vehicle does not have to be on a level surface to be measured properly. For most systems, level is relative to the establishing datum plane -Triangles – you must identify three good points for three-dimensional measuring. Two points do not provide the reference needed to establish a datum measurement. The chair illustrates how three points establish a good foundation and two points do not. Until a triangle known good points is established, the three-dimensional measurements throughout the vehicle cannot be established -Common Base-Measurement Errors – problems that can occur with setting up the base measurements include using a point that is damaged or accidentally using a point that is different than what the equipment maker stated to use. This can cause a reading to be incorrect, as the user told the computer it was the correct location, but it is not. Other problems include changes in vehicle construction that caused the measurements to change and having undercoating or sealing affecting base measurement readings -Center Section Base Point – if there is a center section base point that is not correct, generally there will be multiple areas that show up as damaged, even if no damage exists. This is where the technician must determine if the damage matches what the computer identified as damaged areas. For example, if the damage is in the rear of the vehicle, and the front is not damaged but showing sway or sag, then maybe there is a problem that is affecting the other measurements, and that may stem from an improper base measurement setup -Troubleshooting Measuring Points – to help identify the point that is creating problems, begin by removing the base reference targets. As stated, only three good points are necessary, so removing the point that is causing problems will help with the remainder of the measurements. Perform this check one target at a time, until that point is found. In the graphic, the elongated reference hole should not be used for establishing a base measurement -Vehicles with a Damaged Center Section – if the vehicle center section is out of alignment or one of the four base-measuring points is damaged, look for at least three good points. Measuring systems will be able to make length, height, and width measurements using three good points in the center section. If there are only two good points, you must find a third good point from within the center section. Note that two good points do not allow a height measurement, so a third must be established for the three-dimensional measurement process. This may require some preliminary pulling to restore a damaged point before other damage can be repaired -Determine Which Points to Measure – when you determine which points to measure, choose points based on the extent of damage, and measure as far as possible into the damaged area, or as far away from the base measurements as possible, to get the most accurate picture of the damage. Short measurements may be within specification, but as measurements are projected out toward the end of the vehicle, you may find that the measurement is now out of specification -Determine Which Points to Measure (cont’d) – you should choose points such as holes, slots, bolts, etc. Based on how the vehicle is assembled, it is recommended to use the points that were used to jig the vehicle structure during assembly. This graphic highlights multiple areas of the underbody that can be measured. -Measuring Outside the Center Section – small amounts of damage or structural distortion can distort other areas of the vehicle. Because of this, you should choose points outside the base-reference points to measure as much of a part as possible to determine the extent of damage. For example, if a front rail is damaged, continue making rearward measurements to determine where the damage stops. Note; Sometimes parts must be removed on the vehicle underbody to access the measuring points and take measurements. Taking the time to identify problems with the vehicle structure will ultimately reduce cycle time -Sectioning – during the straightening process, if a part is going to be sectioned, measure closest to the sectioning location. The area behind and adjacent to the sectioning location is what needs to be repaired. There is no need to measure into the area that will be removed, except for documentation purposes -Radiating Damage – vehicles with moderate damage or more can have damage that radiates to the opposite side of the vehicle. With the use of high-strength steel, especially around the passenger compartment, vehicles may look like there is no damage away from the point of impact, but the transfer of collision energy around the passenger compartment can put damage into the opposite side of the impact. Measuring the entire vehicle can help identify any issues, such as indirect damage or prior damage -Measuring Full-Frame Vehicles – measuring full-frame vehicles is similar to measuring the underside of a unitized structure. However, note that with full-frames, there is a separate unitized structure (cab) that is mounted to it. Depending on the measuring system, you may need to treat the cab and the frame separately, with each having their own centerlines. Using the frame centerline when measuring the cab can create problems if the cab is not exactly centered on the frame. You may use the frame centerline to make measurements on the unitized structure. It is important for you to know your measuring system to understand how cab measurements are made -Measuring Full-Frame Cab Points – measuring equipment makers provide specifications for the frame, but not always for the cab. To measure the cab, use four symmetrical points under the cab to establish the base points. These points will be manually entered into the measuring system: -Common points include: -Drain holes -Seat belt bolts -Rocker panel pinch welds -To measure the cab, use comparative measurements. Comparative measurements include: -Door openings -Hinges -Radiator core support mounting locations -Other cross measurements, such as the under hood area, pillars, and glass openings -Measuring Suspension Points – measuring suspension-mounting points helps identify whether the suspension mounts are in the correct locations and identifies damaged suspension system parts. This ensures that a vehicle may be aligned. If mounts or parts are damaged, the correct angles for steering and suspension, such as caster, camber, toe, steering axis inclination (SAI), or thrust angle, may not be able to be achieved. Note: Measuring suspension points can reduce cycle time by reducing the number of times a vehicle is sent out for alignment. Each time a vehicle is sent out, there is an increase in labor times and repair time. This can be avoided by ensuring the vehicle structure is aligned before the vehicle is sent out for a wheel alignment -What the Numbers mean – after the vehicle has been measured, it is time to interpret the numbers. You need to determine: -Do the measurements match the damage? -How far into the vehicle does the damage go? -Is there damage beyond the area of direct impact? -Note: At this point, you can see how far the damage extends into the vehicle and can being formulating your repair plan to determine how the damage will be removed from the structure -Do You Believe in Numbers? – if the measuring results are showing damage in an area that is not damaged, the numbers may not be right. This may be due to changes to measuring points that occur from changes to vehicle design. This can occur mid-model year on some vehicles. It may also be due to changes to the type of construction material used for vehicle design. This, too, can occur mid-model year or even in different model years of the same body style. If the vehicle maker uses different vendors, the part design may not be exactly the same as the previous vendor. Finally, numbers which don’t make sense may be due to problems with the base-reference-point setup -Troubleshooting the Numbers – if the numbers do not look like they match the damage, examine the base-reference points for potential problems. Look for damage, obstructions, etc. If you are using four base-reference points, removing or checking one of the base reference points at a time may help determine if the problem is related to a specific base-reference point or if the problem is somewhere else -Troubleshooting the Numbers (cont’d) – when checking the points, make sure the targets or sensors are hung properly. If using a laser-type measuring system, make sure there are no obstructions between the target and the laser sensor. The image here shows an improperly seated target. This will provide a false reading. Additionally, be sure that the measurement is taken from the correct point and that the correct adapters are used -Use Common Sense – three-dimensional measuring systems do not remove the need for common sense. When measuring, some things simply cannot occur. For example: -Vehicle parts cannot get longer in a collision -If there is absolutely no damage to a frame rail, does it make sense that it measures 25 mm too short? -Can a vehicle have a banana-shape with light damage to the front rail? -Note: Examine the data from the measuring system. If the measurements do not match the damage, start thinking of what could be causing the problem. Are the base measurements in specification? Are the correct measuring points chosen? Has anything changed to the vehicle construction from previous models? -Interpreting the Numbers – -When interpreting the numbers, you should identify: -The specifications that are out of tolerance -The location of the primary damage -The location of secondary damage, if any -Note the measurements of the front rail, front torque box, and rear rail on the dimension sheet shown here: -Using this graphic, you should be able to identify the following: -The left and right front rails are out of specification. All numbers in red are out of specification -The primary damage is located on the front of the vehicle -There is no secondary damage -Diamond Causes – diamond occurs from an impact to one side of a full-frame vehicle or the vehicle takes a hard hit to the suspension. In a front collision, inertia causes one side of the frame to continue its forward momentum, while the other side stops. In a rear collision, the impact to one side can push that side of the frame forward. It is important to note that with late-model frames, severe diamond is less likely a repairable option. Due to the increase in steel strength and more complex frame designs, kinks often occur to the frame crossmembers -Confirming Diamond – if diamond is suspected, use the zero plane to measure for diamond. When using electronic measuring systems, the zero plane often splits the measurement difference. In a measuring printout, one side of the frame will have positive measurements and the other side will have equal negative measurements. The computerized display for electronic measuring systems may show one side forward and the other side rearward -Upperbody Measuring Considerations – when measuring the upperbody, realize the upperbody and underbody may react differently in a collision. Design and material content of a vehicle will determine how a vehicle reacts in a collision. For example, with a cargo van, there can be significant damage to the upper structure in a rear or side collision, but there will be less on vehicles with lower profiles. Damage can radiate upward, in addition to forward and rearward. For example, sway in the lower body structure can cause panel gaps to be off on the doors, hood, and deck lid, as well as a wrinkle in the roof or roof rails -Where to Get Upperbody Measuring Data – most electronic measuring systems do not come with three-dimensional upperbody measurements. Many will provide point-to-point measurements, which can be used to make sure the upper structure has been restored. This will help ensure panels fit during the repair process. Because three-dimensional upperbody measurements may not be supplied by the equipment makes, measuring systems have features that allow technicians to create their own measurement points. This can be done through comparative measurements. This requires taking measurements from an undamaged side of the vehicle to set the baseline and then taking a measurement from the damaged side -Common Measuring Points – common points measured on a vehicle include: -Points along the upper rail (e.g., hood attachment and radiator core support attachment points) -Door openings, including hinge mounting points -Notches along the hem flanges -Door striker bolts -Stationary glass openings -Using Three-Dimensional Equipment for Upperbody Measurements – most electronic and fixture systems have extensions to measure upperbody locations. Some have specific equipment designed to measure the strut tower positions, but can be adapted to measure many of the upperbody points -Upperbody Bar – the upperbody bar for this universal fixture system is used to measure the strut tower position -Strut Tower Measurements – in this graphic, the long vertical bar next to the fender is part of the upperbody measurement tool and is being used to take strut tower measurements on this electronic measuring system -Using Tram Gauges for Point-to-Point Measurements – tram gauges can also be used to verify upperbody dimensions and to verify vehicle openings, such as the doors, underhood, and deck lid. They can also be used in areas where it is difficult to measure with three-dimensional equipment. Using point-to-point measurements can increase confidence that three-dimensional measurements are correct. Both point-to-point and three-dimensional measurements are used to verify each other MIG Brazing -Brazing is a form of adhesion joining that melts a filler metal onto the base metal. The metals are joined at a relatively low temperature where the base metal does not melt or fuse with the filler. Because the base metal does not fuse with the filler, brazing joins metals that otherwise would be incompatible. -The MIG Brazing welding - is a nonfusion process which generates heat from 1,675 degrees F to 1,866 degrees F. This allows the electrode to flow and bond to the surface of the metal. Brazing melts only the silicon bronze electrode wire and does not damage the molecular structure of the steel. The flowing, similar to a sweating process, gives the weld a larger footprint or surface area contact than a steel fusion weld. Because there is less heat and no melting of the base metal, MIG Brazing creates minimal damage and preserves zinc coatings for corrosion protection. -GMA Welding – steel welding is a fusion process which creates higher temperatures of 3,000 degrees F. GMA welding uses greater amperage than MIG Brazing. This process melts the filler metal and fuses it with the base metal. -Capillary action – is the flow of silicon bronze which spreads rapidly between the surfaces of the metal being joined. On an open butt joint, the capillary action forms a bead on the front and back of the metal while bonding to the edges too. Unlike steel welding, the root gap is larger to accommodate the capillary action. This gives a large surface bond, creating strengths similar to fusion welds. -Electrode Wire – use a different electrode wire when MIG brazing than when GMA welding. -Alloy – the alloys most commonly used for MIG brazing include – CuSi3 or CuSi-A which is a copper/silicon alloy with about 3% silicon, CuAI8 or CuAI-A1 which is a copper/aluminum alloy with about 8% aluminum. - The numbers on the end of each alloy are the European method of specifying the percentage of the alloying agent. CuSi3 is a copper/silicon alloy with about 3% silicon. CuSi-A is the same electrode as specified by AWS, where ‘A’ represents about 3% silicon. CuAI8 is the European specification for a copper/aluminum alloy. Copper is the main element. CuAI-A1 is the AWS specification. Bronze electrodes are softer than steel electrodes, but not as soft as aluminum. -Common electrode wire diameter are 0.30” (0.8 mm), 0.35” (0.9 mm), 0.40” (1.0 mm). Wire selection should be based on vehicle maker recommendations. When brazing an open butt joint, larger electrode wire diameter achieves better capillary action. -Open Butt Joint – for open butt joints, allow a root gap between the panels of about one-panel thickness for capillary action on the backside. A root gap that is too wide will tend to cause the arc to extinguish. Maintaining the root gap is important for successful capillary action on an open butt joint. Therefore, it is recommended to add tack welds along the joint before starting the bead. The molten metal must be allowed to flow into the joint and around both sides. Look at the backside of the joint to find a brazed bead as proof of capillary action. A butt joint with backing may be specified, depending on your market. -The open butt joint should have the entire joint filled on the face side. There should be a high-profile bead, not a flat bead. The bead should be wide enough to overlap the coupons on each side. The backside of the open butt joint should look similar to the face side, with a high-profile bead along the entire length, overlapping each coupon along the length. -Plug and Double Plug- There should be no sign of the original hole edges showing on the face side. For the backside of the plug and double plug, there should be a heat mark, not a ripple that can be felt. The heat mark should be at least the size of the original hole. The double plug should have an oval heat mark with little or no sign of the break between the original holes. -Shielding Gas – protects the MIG braze puddle. -Protection – shielding gas protects the arc and the molten electrode wire puddle from the atmosphere and airborne contaminants. This is important to avoid contamination which may cause porosity in the MIG braze. -Argon – the shielding gas used for MIG brazing is 100% argon. It provides good arc stabilization and less zinc vaporization. -Adjusting Flow – the typical flow rate is 25-30 cfh (11.8 – 14.6 L/min). It is important to verify that the gas regulator (flow gauge) has the correct scale for pure argon (Ar) -Short Circuit – once a welding machine is set to weld in the short-circuit transfer method allows the electrode wire to touch the workpiece momentarily. This short-circuits the electrode, creates an arc, and allows current to flow from the base metal into the electrode wire. This process occurs many times per second. The advantage of short-circuit transfer is that it uses lower amperage and voltage than other transfer methods. -Slot on Lap Joints – the slot on lap joints configuration is most commonly used by vehicle makers for MIG brazing. It may be required when installing panels either made from, or attaching to, High Strength Steel (HSS) or Ultra High Strength Steel (UHSS). Slots are made by drilling or punching consecutive holes and cleaning up the edges with a die grinder. When making lap joints, verify capillary action on the backside of the top workpiece. Do not apply too much pressure when clamping, as this may adversely affect capillary action. One vehicle maker specifies a related configuration by using one or two holes in place of the slot. -Slots – for slots, the vehicle maker may specify MIG brazing only one edge to replicate the original appearance and strength. If the vehicle maker specifies the slot weld be completely filled, there should be no sign of the original slot edges showing on the face side after you perform the peel test. The heat mark on the backside should be at least the size of the original slot. -Spray Arc – pulse spray arc uses a background current to preheat the electrode and base metal to maintain the arc. With pulse spray arc, tiny droplets of molten metal are sprayed across the electric arc and deposited onto the metal. The power source rapidly pulses between high peak current and low background current. The background current keeps the arc continuous, yet is not hot enough for metal transfer to occur. It is also designed to keep the electrode warm, reducing splatter and stabilizing the arc. A pulse spray arc welding machine is synergic, in that with one dial setting, voltage and wire speed (current) are both changed proportionally. -Techniques for MIG Brazing -Push, Pull or stitch - The push technique is recommended for MIG brazing the slot, double plug, or single plug. Pushing directs the shielding gas forward for better arc stabilization. This technique also pre heats the workpiece, allowing the MIG brazing electrode to flow better. Pushing helps the vaporized zinc to escape. It can also allow the technician to see the arc for better control. Using the pull technique does not preheat the metal as much. The pull technique traps more zinc in the MIG brazing zone, creating more porosity. Because of the higher zinc vapor content trying to escape the seam, the arc stability will fluctuate more. When brazing open butt joints, use the stitch method . -Work and Travel Angle – welding gun work angle is the angle of the welding gun to the joint. It affects where the electrode wire is aimed at the joint. The work angle for most MIG brazing is near 90 degrees to the joint. The travel angle is about 60 degrees. For a stitch method on the open butt joint, use an 80 degree angle. -Travel Speed – the joint configuration determines the travel speed you will use. For slots, begin slowly and end faster. For a double plug, also being slowly to ensure capillary action on the backside. Unlike the other configurations, the open butt joints use the stitch method. The continuous method does not achieve capillary action if it is too fast. -Pattern – with a single plug, double plug, and slot joint, make the braze using a zigzag pattern. Start outside of the opening in the top piece, work across, and end outside of the opening. Use the machine in pulse to help achieve the capillary action. This method allows the silicone bronze wire to melt and flow between the workpieces on the perimeter of the holes. The zigzag pattern forms a larger footprint beyond just the base of the holes, giving strength to the MIG brazing joint. -Stick Out – stick out is the distance from the end of the contact tip to the end of the electrode wire. Stick out may also be called contact tip-to-workpiece distance. When MIG brazing, stick out should be considerably longer than when GMA welding ¾ (19 mm) or longer. Longer stick out helps preheat the filler wire for greater capillary action and helps prevent making holes along the joint. -Dressing – if finishing the joint with a grinder, use 50-80 grit discs. Apply light pressure to the grinder. There are fewer sparks when grinding a bronze bead. Be alert to where you direct the grinding debris. Also, use caution when grinding to avoid removing excess filler material or base metal that will weaken the joint. Some vehicle makers may have statements regarding dressing. The joint may not require dressing if the joint is not visible after repairs are complete. -Wire Feeder and Drive Rolls – the wire feeder delivers the electrode wire to the arc automatically at a constant speed. Generally, the wire speed control also regulates the current flow of the machine. As the wire speed rate is increased, the amperage is increased as well. With pulse spray arc transfer, the amperage is constantly changing as the machine pulses. MIG brazing electrode wire is softer than steel electrodes, but not as soft as aluminum electrodes. Dedicated drive rolls that are U-shaped are typically recommended over the V-shaped type. Using these recommendations can help reduce cross contamination and limit birdnesting of the electrode wire. Moveable Glass Removal and Installation -Moveable Glass – moveable glass may include door glass, quarter glass, and sunroofs. Moveable back glass is also available on some sport-utility vehicles (SUVs) and pickup trucks. Moveable glass may be laminated, but is typically tempered. Tempered glass will shatter upon impact, limiting repair options to minor surface scratches. Minor cracks in laminated door glass may be repairable if the damage is contained to the outer laminate. (Laminated on the left, Tempered on the right) -Glass Inspection – inspect movable glass for: -Cracks -Deep pits -Chipped edges -Scratches -Damage to the interior side caused by mass inertia -Signs of improper previous installation -* Disasembly may be required to completely inspect movable glass. This is especially true if the door glass was lowered, or open, during the collision. If damage restricts the operation of the window regulator, further disassembly will likely be needed, and may include the removal of the glass to completely inspect movable glass for damage. If the glass is broken, cover the area to prevent moisture from damaging the vehicle interior. *Damage that can be felt with your fingernail is typically not repairable. -Tint Identification – it is important to identify the correct window tint for the replacement glass. Coding information, or markings, located on the bottom of the glass may indiciate the type of tint. If that is not availabe, you may place a white sheet of paper behind the glass on the undamaged side to help identify the level or color of tint. A seam line near the top portion of the glass may identify aftermarket tint. The percent of tint, as well as the contact information of the facility that applied the tint originally, may be necessary information in order to complete the repair. -Glass cleanup – Thoroughly remove shatterd glass to ensure occupant safely and proper operation of mechanical parts. Pieces of glass may fall into heater vents. Turn the blower motor on high, with the selector in the A/C or Vent position, while vacuuming to clear the vents of any glass fragments. Glass pieces may also fall into areas that can restrict the movement of mechanical parts. Clean the glass run channels, seat tracks, and seat belt retractors. Also, remove glass that has fallen between the door instrusion beam and the outer door panel. -Removing Door Glass – some front and rear door glass is attached using ball and socket joints into sliding clips. In some cases, door glass may be removed by prying off the spring clips with a screw driver and releasing the socket hold on the glass. In other cases, it may be removed by pulling the ball joints out of the sockets and lifting the glass out from the top of the door. Other door glass may be bolted to the window regulator. Bolts will need to be removed before the door glass can be removed. -Fastener Considerations – when installing glass fasteners that hold movable glass and hardware, there are several fastener considerations: -Torque – when installing glass fasteners that hold movable glass and hardware, ensure the proper torque specification and tightening sequences for multiple fasteners are observed. Torque specifications can be found in original equipment manufacturer (OEM) service information -Compounds, Sealers, or Lubricants – only use locking compounds, sealers, or lubricants on fasteners where recommended by the vehicle maker. Using lubricants where not recommended can affect torque readings and lead to improper torque. Failure to use locking compounds where called for may result in the loosening of fasteners due to vibration and use. -Bolted Glass Fastener – there are many considerations for removal and replacement of door glass that is fastened to the regulator with bolts or nuts. Retaining nuts that hold the glass to the regulator may be present. These nuts may have a special design with a large, thin, flat head. Special tools are required to remove these nuts. Plastic protective washers may be located between the glass and the fasteners. -Sunroof Glass – roof panels may be equipped with a glass panel called a sunroof or a movable panoramic roof. Panoramic roofs are wider than sunroofs and extend closer to the sides of the vehicle for more view or light. Sunroofs may be designed to fully open by sliding the glass backwards. Certain considerations must be taken for inspection and replacement of sunroof and panoramic glass. -Sunroof Inspection – prior to starting the repair, sunroofs should be inspected for -Proper operation through the whoile range of movement -Misaligned or damaged guide rails -Damaged weatherstripping -Damaged or missing clips or other parts, such as switches, cables, or gears -Damage to the air deflector -Pinched drain tubes -* Plan to replace the glass if it is damaged. Determine if the mounting parts will be replaced or reused -Sunroof Assembly Replacement Considerations – when preparing to replace a sunroof or movable panoramic roof assemblies there are many things to consider. Consider what parts require replacement and which parts can be ordered seperatly. For example, only the glass may require replacement, while the frame and assembly are unharmed. Determine whether the parts are bolted or bonded, as the glass may be bolted to the frame and the frame may be bolted or bonded to the roof. Consider which, if any, adjacent parts will need to be removed. The headliner may require removal or repositioning. It may also be recommended to remove an adjacent panoramic roof when the sunroof assembly requires replacement. Vehicle maker procedures must be followed to ensure the roof sunroof is installed properly and to prevent damage to adjacent parts. * An initialization procedure may be required when replacing sunroof or panoramic roof parts. The use of a scan tool may be required. Consult OEM service information for the exact procedure and tools required. -Sliding Sunroofs – sliding sunroofs are typically power-driven, cable-operated, for the glass panel movement and fature a modular design. Factory-installed sunroof installations usually have the glass panel slide back between the roof outer skin and the interior headliner, although there may be exceptions. In many cases, when it is necessary to remove and install a complete sunroof assembly, such as for roof skin replacement, the sunroof may be removed and installed as a modular assembly, requiring little disassembly of the sunroof parts. -Removal – when working with the sliding sunroof assemblies, where possible, remove and install as a complete assembly. This will ensure that the alignment and cable timing is not disturbed. Use caution to avoid damaging the interior trim parts, such as the headliner. When removing the sliding sunroof, consider that side curtain airbags may be located between the roof structure and the headliner. Ensure the airbag systems are disabled when working around side airbags. * Follow the vehicle maker’s procedures at all times. OEM service information typically has information on the replacement and service of sunroof assemblies, including procedures for disabling the airbag system -Replacement – replacing the sliding sunroof may include -Removing the headliner, connectors, and drainage tubes -Removing bolts and spacers around the perimeter of the sunroof -Dropping the sunroof down from opening and then lifting out of the top -Adjusting the replacement sunroof after installation -Calibrating and/or initalizing the sunroof, if required. -* Bolts and spacers have various thicknesses and lenghts. When removing, note their position for reinstallation. Nissan GT-R -GT-R Heritage – -Nissan Skyline GT-R – High performance versions of the Skyline coupe -The current GT-R is a stand-alone model. Available in the North American market since 2008, as a 2009 model. -Model Availability – as of 2018, the Nissan GT-R is available in four models. -Pure -Premium -Track Edition – available with the 2017 model year -NISMO – introduced in model year 2015 -Vehicle Design and Construction – -Mixed material construction – -High-strength steels (HSS) -Aluminum -Plastics -Carbon fiber -Follow best practices – -Avoid cross-contamination -Ensure personal safety -Ensure vehicle protection -Ensure quality repair -Steel – all steel over 370 MPa is high-strength steel (HSS) -Steel that is 980-1350 MPa is considered ultra-high strength steel (UHSS) -All GT-R steel parts are galvannealed -Aluminum- - Aluminum parts may be stamped, extruded, or cast. -Stamped aluminum parts on the GT-R -Hood -Deck lid -Door panels -The aluminum bumper assemblies are extruded -Aluminum castings -Front strut towers -Door shells -Rear seatback support -Plastics and Carbon Fiber – front and rear bumper covers are polypropylene. Door mirro housings and the rear spoiler are ABS plastic. Carbon fiber parts are the valence at the bottom of the bumper fascia and side rocker panels or sills. All models have a carbon fiber radiator core support. The NISMO edition has more parts made of carbon fiber. -Undercovers and Diffusers – undercovers are on the front underside. Diffusers are on the rear underside. The three undercovers are polypropylene. The front diffuser is also made of polypropylene, while the rear diffuser is made of carbon fiber. Inspect undercovers and diffusers for damage following a collision. -Ground Clearance – low ground clearance. Tapered ramps allow clearance for jacking and lifting. -Foam – two types of foam used in the structure -Flexible NVH foam -Carrier foam -Carrier foam -High-stiffness forming material -Highly rigid foaming agent two types of foam include flexible foam (left) in the A-pillar and carrier foam (right) in the quarter panel. -Attachment Methods – identifying the joining process is important to provide an accurate repair. Body has many factory lap joints. No conventional outer uniside – body side construction done with separate parts. -Material Identification – service information. -Material identification -Repair or replace decisions -Limits of repairability -Note: Identification determines removal and attachment tools, equipement, or techniques. -Body Center Marks – body center marks are small idents along the body centerline, such as in the windshield opening. -Repair Network Overview – shops must be in the Nissan GT-R Certified Collision Repair Network to work on the vehicle. -Must be inspected annually -Shop must meet certain requirements -Training – Nissan and I-CAR -Parts -Equipment -Aluminum capable -Note: to locate a Nissan GT-R Certified Collision Center, us e the search option at collision.nissanusa.com/gt-r -Certified Shop Requirements – Genuine Nissan parts and Nissan repair procedures. This helps ensure: -Safety systems are operational -Original appearance and performance are restored -Factory warranty is protected -Brand expectations are met -Note: one of Nissan’s repair requirements for the GT-R is mounting the vehicle on a Celette fixture bench -Assessment of Damage – refer to the Structural Damage Grade Chart for assessment of damage. Grade A and B repairs must be done at Nissan GT-R Certified Collision Repair network facilities. -Category grade A are structural repairs. -Category grade B are non-structural repairs. -GR-R Parts Considerations – Nissan does restrict the sale of certain GT-R parts to their network of Dealers. Shops requesting affected GT-R parts will be asked to provide additional documentation on repairs before parts will be released. Only GT-R repairs done at Nissan GT-R Certified Collision Repair Network shops are acceptable by Nissan. -Nissan Position Statements – Nissan Position Statements call out the position of the manufacturer regarding certrain repair procedures or practices. For ultimate repair guidance, reference Nissan’s technical service information. The most up-to-date Nissan position statements can be accessed free of charge from the collision.nissanusa.com website. May also be accessed on the I-CAR.com website under the Technical Knowledge and OEM information tabs. Panel Removal and Preparation for Installation 1/3 -Three commonly used welding machines are -Squeeze-type resistance spot welding (STRSW) -STRSW welding uses a machine with two arms to apply pressure and electric current to the welding location. -Gas Metal Arc (GMA) -GMA welding process, an electrode filler wire is fed continuously into the weld puddle while the puddle is protected by shielding gas -Metal inert gas (MIG) brazing -MIG brazing is a type of GMA welding that uses a silicon bronze filler wire. -Hem Flange Removal -one method for removing the door skin includes the following steps -Removing the edge of the hem flange using a disc grinder -Grinding until separation between the outer panel and the door shell is visible -Removing the spot welds around the window frame (if equipped) -Separating the bonded flange (if bonded) using heat (not to exceed 400 degrees F) -Removing the remaining strip of flange and the door panel with a hammer and chisel (if necessary) * Some panels may require an access hole cut -Spot Weld Removal -Squeeze-Type resistance spot welding (STRSW), sometimes called spot welding, is one of the most common part attachment methods for steel panels and may also be used by the vehicle maker on aluminum panels; however, this is not common. Removing spot welded parts begins by first locating, then removing, the vehicle maker original spot welds. Depending on the tool, a center punch may be useful to prevent the drill bit from wandering. When removing spot welds, make sure not to drill through the inner panel flange if welding is to be performed on the outside of the panel. Spot weld removal tools are sensitive to heat and require cooling between cuts. Make sure the tools are properly sharpened or replaced when dull. -Identifying Spot Weld Locations -Use OEM procedures to see the illustration -Remove seam sealer and coatings at suspected joint areas -Look near panel edges and on areas where there are overlapping pieces. -Spot Weld Removal Considerations – removing spot welds is a misleading term, in that with spot welds: -There is no nugget to remove. No metal was added to the joint -The metal between the electrode tips was made molten by the heat formed from the high resistance. After the current shut off, the metal solidified, forming the weld -A hole through both panels will eliminate the weld site -A hole through the outer piece or pieces, or ground down to the bottom piece, will allow the outer piece or pieces to be pried off -The pieces can be separated with a chisel -Spot Weld Removal Choice Factors – the method of removing the spot welds and the tool selected to remove a particular set of spot welds: -Access to the joint, as some tools will not fit where the spot welds must be removed -Whether the panel will be reused, as some methods make the part unusable, such as when using a grinder -The type of replacement attachment method: the most common is Squeeze-Type resistance spot welding (STRSW), but other welding and/or riveting may be required depending on the procedure, which may or may not require holes in the flanges. -Spot Weld Removal Choice Factors, cont’d -If repair spot welds will be used, there should be no holes left on the inner or base panel. Other methods, like drilling all the way through both panels (commonly done when using two twist drill bits), require plug welds be made from the backside. * Drilling through both panels eliminates the need to punch plug weld holes into the replacement panel. Make sure there is access on the opposite side to weld the panel. -Removing Spot Welds from Boron-Alloyed Steel -Some parts are made of boron-alloyed steel, a type of ultra-high-strength steel that is difficult to drill. When removing these parts using a drill, it helps to drill the spot welds from the opposite side, if the steel is a lower-strength steel. In many cases, an air chisel can be used to separate the mild steel panel from ultra-high strength steel by working the chisel between the two metals and breaking the spot weld free. Caution must be taken to prevent damaging the boron-alloyed steel reinforcement. If damaged, the reinforcement will need to be replaced. Boron-alloyed steel or any ultra-high strength steel cannot be repaired. -Panel Removal Tools –When removing a panel it may be beneficial to cut away a large portion of the panel being replaced to assist in the panel removal process. This may provide greater access to the flange areas. Doing this ensures that no damage is caused to underlying parts. After removing the spot welds, a hammer and chisel can be used to separate the two panels. -Bonded Panel Removal using Heat – vehicle makers may use adhesive on some parts, but more commonly, adhesive is used in conjunction with other attachment methods; therefore, heat may be required to help with part removal. Follow vehicle maker recommendations on heating temperature limits. Most adhesives will release at 400 degrees F or less. * An induction heater may be used to loosen some adhesive bonded parts, however care must be taken to avoid overheating adjacent parts. -Bonded Panel Removal – Mechanical – while not as common, some panel installations may use an adhesive bead similar to windshield urethane to attach the part. Mechanical cutting tools may be used to cut the adhesive bead. To remove a bonded panel using mechanical cutters: -Determine if a layer of existing adhesive needs to be left intact -Remove any mechanical fasteners -Use a piano wire or pneumatic knife to cut the adhesive -Remove loose urethane adhesive when done -Trim the remaining urethane adhesive to remove any high spots. High spots may result in the uneven application of replacement adhesives -* The type of flange design may dictate the type of method used to separate the adhesive bond. For example, a roof structure may prevent a pneumatic knife from accessing the adhesive. Therefore, piano wire may be a better tool for cutting the urethane adhesive -Hem Flange Removal – when removing an adhesively bonded panel along the hemmed area: -Grind the outer edge of the panel using an angle grinder or other hem flange removal tool to release the hem -Insert a panel separating tool along the edge to separate the panels -Separate the panels by applying heat to soften the adhesive if required -* If grinding, a 36-50 grit disc may be used. Do not remove material from the supporting panel -Laser Welds – several vehicle makers use laser welds instead of spot welds for attaching some parts. Laser welds: -Have a low-heat affect, are much longer than spot welds, and access to only one side is needed -Look similar to a skinny GMA weld with the bead concave rather than convex -May be continuous across the flange or finished in shorter intervals -May use a silicon bronze filler metal, in the case of laser brazing -* Examples of laser welds are on tailor-welded joints, which combine different thicknesses or strengths of steel along the length of the same panel -Removing Laser Welds – -The laser weld removal tool is designed specifically for allowing depth control -A die grinder tool can be used, similar to grinding off the top of a spot weld site. Care must be taken to avoid grinding into the underlying part -The panel must still be pried off once the weld is removed -* Laser welds cannot be duplicated and are usually replaced with spot welds, GMA plug welds, or adhesive -Removing a MIG Braze Slot Weld -Vehicle makers may use MIG brazing in slots in certain locations where it is desired to reduce heat input to preserve metal strength and lessen damage to coatings, and may be used on ultra-high strength steel (UHSS) parts where spot welds do not reach. Silicon bronze is typically the filler material used. Removing a MIG braze slot requires careful grinding of the silicon bronze filler and usually requires grinding away some of the outer panel around the slot due to capillary action of the filler, placing it between the panels as well. Care must be taken to avoid removing material from underlying panels -Riveted Exterior Panels – Riveted panels are most common on vehicles with aluminum parts, but may be used on steel and other construction materials. Adhesives are typically used in conjunction with the rivets; this is commonly referred to as rivet bonding, to increase joint strength. Before removing rivets, it is important to identify the replacement attachment method, as this may help inform as to the best removal method. Rivet (rivet bonded) panels usually require rivet bonding during replacement; however, some part replacement procedures may specify welding. Some attachment methods require holes in one or both panels, while others do not. -Types of Rivets -Solid rivets, known as straight, conventional, or solid shank rivets -Identified by the shape of the head, material (steel or aluminum), and the diameter and length of the shank -Identified by the vehicle maker for use in specific location -Installed with a bucktail on the backside -Used in place of an SPR or factory weld location, if specified by the vehicle maker -* Solid rivets may have a protruding head, such as a pan head or button head, or be countersunk. Countersunk is also referred to as flush mounted. The bucktail may also be called the shop head, upset head, driven, or bucked head. -Solid Rivet Removal -Grinding -Grind off the head or bucktail (whichever is exposed) of the rivet, and tap out the body using a punch that is one size smaller than the rivet body -Avoid grinding into the panel if it is to remain in service -Drilling -Center-punch the head of the rivet in preparation for drilling -Select a drill bit one size smaller than the head of the rivet -Drill through the center of the rivet to remove the head only -Tap out the rivet using care to not damage the area where the rivet was installed -Do not oversize the hole or stretch the metal during the removal process -* Use caution not to drill into the panel -Self-piercing rivets (SPR) -Self-piercing rivets (SPRs) are made of tin/zinc coated steel. SPRs are most commonly used on vehicles with aluminum construction, but may also be found on steel parts in some situations. Adhesives are usually used with SPRs -SPR Removal -There are four ways to remove SPRS, including pressing, weld-on stud, drilling, and grinding -Pressing – SPRs may be removed by pressing them out using a special tool. When an SPR is removed, a hole is made in the panels as the rivet is removed. The metal may be distorted after pressing the SPR out, so straightening the flange may be necessary. Follow vehicle maker procedures. If holes remain, they will be filled with adhesive upon installation of the replacement panel. -Weld-On Stud- A weld-on stud can be used for removing an SPR. The steel pulling stud is attached to the head of the rivet using special equipment, and then the SPR is removed using a slide hammer or pneumatic rivet gun with special tip adapters. -Drilling – An SPR can also be removed by drilling through it from the backside of the rivet. The drill bit remains centered by the SPR. Although it is not common, when drilling from the front side, center-punching the rivet head will help keep the drill bit centered. SPRs are usually very hard steel. Drill at low speed to preserve the bit cutting edge -Grinding – Grinding is performed from the backside of the SPR. Analyze the risks of grinding the steel rivet on an aluminum part. Grinding too much will weaken the metal. Some vehicle makers recommend not grinding SPRs due to potential of galvanic corrosion. -* For vehicle protection, remove self-piercing rivets, shavings or grinding particles that drop inside of the vehicle. Use a magnet or a sparkless vacuum to retrieve the material. If the material is not removed, the rivets could rattle and make noise, or cause galvanic corrosion. -Blind rivets -A blind rivet does not require backside access for installation. Specialty blind rivets may be recommended. These types of rivets may: -Be all aluminum or steel. -Require a special blind rivet gun to set the rivets -* Blind rivets commonly have a protruding head; however, there are flush rivets specified in some procedures. Blind rivets applications may include structural areas as well as cosmetic panels, and usually require adhesive in the joint area. -Clinches Introduction – Clinching is a vehicle maker press and die process for joining nonstructural panels. The press and die process uses the panel as its own fastener. Clinching locks the panel together and does not make a hole in the panel. * Clinches are not duplicated in a repair facility. -Clinch Locations – Locations of clinched aluminum exterior panels include -Inner and outer hood panels. The inner and outer panels are clinched by the vehicle maker and replaced as an assembly -Areas of the outer quarter panel to the structure of the vehicle -Areas of the door skin to the door shell -Inner fender reinforcements to the fender -Cowl-to-plenum area -Deck lid inner panels -Clinch Removal and Replacement -During repairs, clinches are usually replaced with rivet bonding using solid or blind rivets at locations identified in the vehicle service information. Clinches can be removed by drilling through the clinch, or by pressing the clinch flat with dies on a pressing tool. If drilling, a bit sized for the replacement rivet that will be used to reassemble the panels can be used. Panel Removal and Preparation for Installation 2/3 -Preparing a mating flange after outer panel removal requires -Cleaning the flange so it is free of corrosion and/or adhesive -Straightening mating panel flanges -Applying corrosion protection to bare steel areas along the flange as required by vehicle maker installation method. -* While cleaning the flange, try to avoid removing the zinc coating. A plastic-coated abrasive wheel may be used to clean a flange of remaining adhesive. Avoid grinding unless necessary. Exercise caution to avoid thinning the attaching surface. * The corrosion protection type will vary based on the method of attachment. After applying corrosion protection, it may be beneficial to remove primer/E-coat from the weld zones to improve weld quality. -Panel Preparation on Replacement Part – Similar to flange preparation, preparing the replacement panel also requires: -Straightening mating flange deformations using a hammer and dolly -Removing primer from the weld zone -Cleaning the mating flange -Applying corrosion protection to bare steel areas -Vehicle Maker Panel Alignment Specifications – Some vehicle makers provide panel fit standards to prevent excessive wind noise and water leaks, and to ensure a uniform gap between panels. Common panel gaps are between 3-8mm for most vehicles. If no specifications exist from the vehicle maker, make sure that the gaps are even around the entire panel or correspond with the panel gaps on the opposite side of the vehicle. Check panel fit with the suspension loaded, as the body may flex with the suspension unloaded. Adjusting the panels while the vehicle is flexed changes the panel gaps. It is also possible that weld-on panels will dent or buckle once the suspension is loaded. -Test Fitting a panel – Locking pliers, clamps, or other fasteners temporarily hold the panel in place while test fitting. -Weld Attachment Techniques – There are several welding techniques used for panel attachment. The three common types of panel attachment methods are: -Squeeze-type resistance spot welding (STRSW) -When using STRSW to attach panels, follow the vehicle maker flange preparation procedures for mating flanges. Coatings should be removed from the spot weld area where the tips will contact bare steel. -GMA plug welding -GMA plug welding requires: Drilling or punching holes, Identifying the number and location of the plug welds, A 5/16 inch (8 mm) hole, it no recommendations exist. Some vehicle makers provide recommendations for the number, locations, and size of the plug welds required to attach a panel. Also, check the flange size. If the hole is too big for the flange width, a smaller plug weld hole is required. -MIG brazing, silicon bronze -Replacing panels at factory seams may include locating silicon bronze joints on the panel; this material may look like brass. Use the GMA process (also known as MIG brazing) to apply silicon bronze. MIG brazing produces a small heat affect zone. There are different alloys of electrode wire for this process; therefore, it is important to reference service information for the correct selection. MIG brazing should not be confused with oxyacetylene torch brazing, which is not commonly recommended due to the large heat affect zone. It is important to note that neither process is designed to fuse the joint, but forms an adhesive bond with the base metal. -Hem Flange Installation – When installing a panel using a hem flange -Apply adhesive to the panel where the hem flange will be made and to both sides of the flange to seal out moisture and contaminants -Use a hammer and dolly or a hem flange tool to make the hem flange -Remove excessive adhesive from the panels -* If replacing a door panel, apply adhesive to both sides of the doorframe flange that will be attached to the door panel -General Rivet Bonding – Typically, adhesives are used when riveting panels. This is called rivet bonding. Adhesives provide good shear strength and rivets have good peel strength. When rivet bonding, it is important to follow vehicle maker and product maker recommendations include: -Removing remaining adhesive, coatings, and surface contaminants -Straightening the flange -Making rivet holes -Countersinking for countersunk rivets -Dimpling, if using countersunk rivets on thinner aluminum -Removing burrs -* Some vehicle and product makers recommend the use of a silica stone and/or other special treatment to bare aluminum prior to applying adhesive -Adhesive Bonding Joints – The vehicle maker will usually specify the type of adhesive for the repair being completed. Adhesive is to be applied following the adhesive maker’s recommendations unless the vehicle maker has specific unique requirements. Adhesives may require application over a bare metal flange, an E-coated or primed flange, or a layer of existing adhesive (generally for urethane applications only) -Solid Rivet Installation – Solid rivet installation requires access to both sides of the panel to compress the rivet. The rivet must be the proper size and alloy for each specific application. Always refer to the vehicle maker for specific rivet recommendations. Solid rivets require holes in both panels for installation. If a rivet was removed, use the existing hole in the inner panel to mark the locations for the hole in the replacement panel unless otherwise directed by the service information. A rivet installation hole is made using a punch or drill size specified by the vehicle maker for the specific rivet type. Flanges must be straight and remain free of burrs to prevent gaps between the panels and poor fit-up. Remove burrs using a deburring tool. For vehicle protection, do not use the rivet gun for panel fit up. Panels must be properly fit with the correct gaps before installing the rivets. -Countersunk Solid Rivet Installation – A countersunk solid rivet head is flush with the surface of the metal and uses a hole that is commonly countersunk to a 100 degree angle. A 100 degree countersunk rivet is the most common rivet, but some vehicle makers use other angles. The benefit of this rivet is that it can be used in the same hole where the SPR was removed. Installation requires a countersinking bit, particullary a travel stop countersink tool, to prevent damage to the panel. The countersunk solid rivet uses a dimpling tool to install the rivet in thin metal. This creates a depression for the countersunk rivet head without removing any metal and maintains panel integrity at the rivet locations. -Self-Piercing Rivet (SPR) Installation – Self-piercing rivets (SPRs) are installed by the vehicle maker. If a repair facility has the proper tools, SPRs can be installed during some vehicle repairs. Vehicle makers may have a specific tool requirement to install SPRs. SPR installation does not require a hole. During installation, the rivet pierces the panels and spreads outward (radially) through the panels. SPRs are one-time use fasteners and are never installed into an existing hole. SPRs may be different sizes depending on vehicle maker requirements. -Flange Preparation for Blind Rivets – Blind rivet installation requires: -Straightening damaged flanges -Test-fitting the panel -A hole in both panels being riveted together -Countersinking for countersunk rivets -Deburring of the exterior and mating surfaces -* The same tools used to countersink solid rivets can also be used for blind rivets. -Panel Installation/Sound-Deadeners – Types of sound-deadening materials include foam pads, foam blocks, foam filler, and anti-flutter material. Transfer sound-deadening materials from the damaged panel to the replacement panel, if possible, or install new sound-deadening material. Heat can be used to loosen sound-deadening materials from the panel, do not use an open flame. In some situations, it may be required to install the replacement sound-deadener or anti-flutter material before installation due to location/access restrictions. Panel Removal and Preparation for Installation 3/3 -Roof panel Replacement Considerations – When removing a roof panel it will be necessary to identify where and how it is attached to the vehicle structure. The roof may have flanges that sit on top of underlying parts, as is common on the front and back flanges, typically concealed by the windshield and back glass. It may have areas of the flange that are sandwiched between other panels, as may be found on some upper outer body side panel to roof joints, or there may be laser welds or MIG braze filets joining some areas, in addition to adhesives and welds. Some vehicles may require additional panels to be replaced or section when replacing the complete roof panel. -Removing Adjacent Parts – Additional items that must be removed or disassembled prior to roof panel replacement include: -Sunroofs (if equipped) -Electrical accessories -Moldings -Drain tubes -Airbags or side airbag curtains (if equipped) -Interior parts such as seats and carpeting -Headliner -Doors -Heating/cooling tunnels -Windshield and back glass -Sunroof drain panels -Antennas -Luggage racks -* Remove all electrical parts. Electrical parts may include dome lamps, stereo control, heat or air conditioning controls, etc. Glass removal is generally required for roof panel installation. Typically, the windshield and back glass are removed. Some designs, however, allow the glass to remain installed during roof panel replacement. -Anti-Flutter Material – Vehicle makers place anti-flutter materials between the roof bows and the roof panel. Anti-flutter materials prevent the roof panel from moving up and down due to air movement or pressure. Sound-deadeners are also placed on the panel to reduce outside noise. -Working with Roof Bows – Roof bows provide support for the roof. The number of roof bows varies from vehicle to vehicle. Steel roof bows are typically welded into place when replaced. Damaged roof bows need to be repaired or replaced depending on the severity of damage, construction material and type of construction. A roof bow has an adhesive and/or anti-flutter material between it and the roof panel. Heat may be required to loosen during panel removal, along with a utility knife, scraper, piano wire, or pneumatic cutting tool. -Sequence of Multiple Panels – Roofs may be connected at the A-pillar, B-pillar, and/or the sail panel area. The joint design could have multiple layers. If replacing multiple panels, it is important to determine the proper replacement sequence. To do this, determine where the roof panel is placed in relation to the pillars and sail panel – between, on top, or beneath. -Weld-Bonded Roof Panel Removal Introduction – while the steps of removing a roof panel depend on the exact make, model, and year of the vehicle, here are some of the typical removal steps for a vehicle with weld bonding and laser braze attachment from the factory. -Removing Panels – when removing a roof panel, make sure adjacent panels and the vehicle structure are in alignment before removing the roof panel. Some vehicle makers recommend cutting a large section from the center of the roof panel for access. Do not cut into roof bows or other underlying structure. Continue the removal process by separating the welds along the roof edges. -Performing the Removal – identify spot weld locations and remove remaining spot welds. Release any adhesive and anti-flutter material using heat from a no-flame heat source. Remove the roof panel and straighten the vehicle flanges -Completing the Removal – if the roof was attached with laser welds or laser brazing, it usually requires removal of any of the remaining roof flange. Remove the flange by grinding off or by grasping with a pliers and moving back and forth until it breaks free of the weld. Exercise caution that metal from the damaged part is breaking free of the weld and that the underlying panel is not being damaged. Repeat this process for the entire length of the flange. Grind off remaining weld. Use caution when grinding to remove only the weld material, do not grind into the base metal. -Weld-Bonded Roof Panel Installation – in preparation for weld-bonding installation, clean the headers to bare metal. Remove the coatings only where the spot weld locations have been marked. Some of the tasks required to install weld-bonded roof panels may include: -Perform a test-fit of the roof panel -Clean the mating surface on the vehicle headers and replacement part -Remove coatings from the replacement panel -Determine if the panel should be welded using spot welds or GMA plug welds -Drill plug weld holes, if required -Position the roof panel on the vehicle -Check the fit and gaps -Make test welds -Apply adhesive -Weld the panel in place -Remove the squeezed-out adhesive -Removing and Installing Bonded-On Roof Panels Introduction – The steps for removing and installing bonded-on roof panels depend on the roof design and the adhesive bonding used to bind the vehicle parts together. Unlike welding, adhesives distribute stress uniformly and form a moisture barrier that minimizes the chance of corrosion. While the process for removing and installing bonded-on roof panels varies by vehicle, there are some common steps that typically apply. -Bonded-On Roof Panel Removal – when removing a roof panel that is bonded on with urethane: -Cut an access hole, if necessary -Unscrew the fasteners (if equipped) -Use piano wire or a pneumatic knife to cut adhesive -Remove the roof panel -* For vehicle protection, do not gouge the flanges or roof bows with the scraper, and replaced all damaged corrosion protection. Note: some procedures require leaving a bed of the original adhesive on the vehicle structure to act as a bed for the replacement adhesive. Only remove adhesive if required by a procedure or due to damage. -Bonded-On Roof Panel Installation – in preparation for bonded-on roof panel installation: -Clean the bonding area on the roof panel and the vehicle -Apply corrosion protection where necessary -Prepare the bonding area per the adhesive maker’s instructions -Trim the remaining adhesive to ensure a smooth surface for the replacement adhesive -Apply the adhesive -Place the panel in position -Clamp in place or install fasteners or welds as required by the vehicle maker -* Note: Some urethane products are applied to a freshly trimmed bed of the remaining original adhesive if it is in good condition. -Completing the Repair - after replacement of any panel complete the repair by: -Dressing the welds, if required -Removing adhesive squeeze-out (if bonded) -Applying corrosion-resistant primer, seam sealers, etc., as required to duplicate the appearance -Refinishing as required -Applying corrosion protection -Reinstalling all trim, wiring, glass, etc., that were removed -Ensuring calibrations are performed (if required) on lane departure cameras and other affected systems -Performing initialization steps on other features such as sunroofs, if required. Part Replacement at Factory Seams (1/2) Preparation -Repair Planning (When to Completely Replace a Part) – replacement of a damaged part at factory seams (complete part replacement) is required when specified by the vehicle maker if straightening is not possible or permitted. This may be for design reasons or to maintain structural integrity. Some structural parts are required to be replaced only in their entirety -Damage – complete part replacement is also required when the damage warrants. For example, there may be a sectioning procedure on a front lower rail, but if the damage extends beyond the designated cut line, the entire rail must be installed. Sectioning should only be done following the vehicle maker recommendations for the specific vehicle make, model, and year -Access/Design – complete part replacement is required when its practical due to access or part design. For example, it may be impractical to replace only part of a radiator core support when it is just a one-piece tie bar connecting the two front upper rails -No Recommendations – complete part replacement is also required when there are no published part replacement or sectioning procedures. With the design of today’s vehicles, it is no longer practical to section a part where it looks convenient and safe to do so. Hidden reinforcements, varied strengths of steel, and other factors known only to the body engineer make this no longer an option -Vehicle Build Sequence/Layering – the vehicle maker may require complete part replacement or removal because of complications due to the vehicle build sequence, for example: -The layering of one part over another may make it necessary to remove a complete undamaged part to access the damaged part -A B-pillar reinforcement that overlaps the rocker panel reinforcement -An apron/strut tower that is layered over an upper or lower front rail, making it difficult to remove the rail without removing the apron/strut tower -Part Removal Planning – when planning part removal, the installation method needs to be considered so the appropriate removal method is used. For example, if spot welding will be used to install the replacement part, then holes should not be drilled through the flanges. Instead, the original welds should be drilled or ground only through the panel being removed, leaving the underlying panels intact at the original weld locations -Service Information – information on removal and installation of complete parts may be limited for some manufacturers, consisting of only a statement to replace the part at factory seams. Illustrations in the manuals may show welds, but they may not show enough detail to identify the number and location of the welds, whereas other vehicle makers may have detailed illustrations that often show the number and locations of welds, rivets, adhesives, etc., to be removed and replaced. The illustrations may also show panel layering and reinforcement locations, often with dotted lines to show these hidden features -Common Parts Completely Replaced – parts of the structure that are commonly replaced at factory seams, rather than repaired or partially replaced, include: -Pillar reinforcements, usually made of UHSS -Rocker panel reinforcements, also usually made of UHSS -UHSS roof rails, usually from the upper A-pillar to just behind the B-pillar -Engine cradles, as they are difficult to return to proper alignment, and can cause drivability or steering and suspension problems if not properly aligned. Also, there are typically no alignment specifications available for engine cradles. -Note: UHSS is being used in more locations to strengthen the passenger cabin and increase occupant protection -Installing Part of an Assembly – using part of an assembly: -Is typically a less intrusive repair, as fewer parts need to be removed or temporarily moved aside -Disturbs fewer original welds -Disturbs less original corrosion protection -Will likely require less refinishing -May improve cycle time -Vehicle Maker-Approved Partial Assembly – the vehicle maker may have a procedure for using part of an assembly, and procedures for disassembling the assembly may or may not be shown. If the repair information shows only a portion of the assembly being used, then it is permissible to separate the identified part from the service part assembly -Adjacent Panel Removal – parts often need to be removed, either for access to damaged parts or for protection when adjacent parts cannot be protected with covers, etc. -Part Removal for Access/Protection – in general, the more complete the replacement, the more adjacent parts must be removed. Radiator core support replacement, for example, requires removal of the radiator, air conditioning condenser, etc. Rear rail replacement, for example, may require removal of the rear body panel, trunk floor, fuel tank, rear suspension and wheels, and exhaust parts -Part Removal for Uniside Replacement – unisides are the one-piece outer panel with front and rear door openings that may include the quarter panel. Part removal for access or protection: -May require roof removal. This is because the uniside attachment to the roof rail may be under the roof panel and cannot be accessed -May require windshield and backglass removal -Will require interior trim removal -Note: Due to the complexity of complete uniside replacement, most vehicle makers allow partial replacement at sectioning locations -Vehicle Detrim – detrimming of the vehicle for part replacement at factory seams will vary depending on the specific part being replaced. For a complete uniside replacement this can be extensive, and typically requires disabling restraint systems and removal of a variety of parts on the affected side of the vehicle including, but not limited to, some restraint system parts, door(s), fender, seat(s), dash, console, headliner, carpet (rollback may be sufficient), trim, and glass, as well as other necessary parts depending on the vehicle and options -Rerouting Wires – it is often necessary to move lines, wires, sensors, and modules out of the way during repairs for drilling, grinding, or welding. This includes: -Removing them if necessary, and/or using wire or twist ties to attach the lines or wiring to another location away from the immediate work area. -Unplugging wiring connectors -Note: Protect the harness and parts from welding sparks and refinishing overspray. Cover connectors and other parts with a plastic bag, welding blankets, or spark paper as necessary to keep contaminants out. Replace any clips and fasteners that are broken, and always put harnesses and parts back to their original locations after repairs -Accessing the Top of B-Pillar Reinforcements – because many damage B-pillar reinforcements have to be removed and replaced in their entirety, there is a question of how to access the top, since the top of the B-pillar reinforcement is under the upper uniside roof rail and may be under the roof panel. How do you access the spot welds on the top? Recommended options include: -Cutting a window out of the uniside roof rail and a portion of the roof, which is considered sectioning. This becoming the most popular option recommended by vehicle makers -Holding the roof temporarily out of the way to access the top welds -Removing the roof, which requires stationary glass removal and is highly labor intensive, and may require replacing the roof panel with a new part -Restore Vehicle Dimensions (Test Fit) – before installing a replacement part or pane, the vehicle dimensions must be restored. Then, the part is fit-up in place to ensure it aligns with the mating and adjacent parts and/or panels -Verifying Service Part – when verifying the service part, first determine if the part comes with or needs separate internal reinforcements. Then, mirror-match parts to ensure it’s the correct service part. While not common, a service part may be slightly different from the part being removed from the vehicle due to a design change, or the part may not have a formed or pierced area on it because it was not on a vehicle body to have that operation performed on the assembly line at the factory. If different, ensure that the supporting documentation is in the repair order file for the vehicle -Determining Weld Locations – when determining the location of repair, spot, or GMA plug welds, always reference the current vehicle maker service information / specifications. In general, spot welds or plug welds should be as close to the original number and location of spot welds as possible. Some vehicle makers provide options. Three representative examples follow: -Space spot or plug welds every 40 mm if original locations cannot be found -Space repair welds 25-30 mm apart, ignoring the original sites -Space welds 20 mm apart -Note: It is not our intent to identify the specific vehicle maker in this course, only reference examples to show there are different service specifications. Some procedures may require the use of rivets and or adhesives in certain locations -Replacing Welds on Scalloped Edges – some vehicle makers use scalloped edges on panels. This is for weight savings, as every little bit counts in making the body weigh less. With these scalloped edges: -The problem with repair is that there is not enough room on the flange to relocate the repair spot welds -The best practice may be to make the repair spot weld in the same spot -If the vehicle maker recommends against using the same spot for the repair welds, use GMA plug welds or other vehicle maker specified attachment method Preparation for Installation -Foam Fillers – noise, vibration, and harshness (NVH) foam fillers: -Are for noise control -May be installed after assembly by the vehicle maker, and commonly replaced by injecting foam into holes after the part is installed. Some foam may be installed before the part is installed -Should be replaced in the same amounts as was removed. This requires knowing how much the foam will expand, which is best determined by dispensing a sample in a container. -Note: Some foams expand ten-times their original size. Try to estimate exactly how much foam is needed for the cavity. It is common error to apply too much, which is not better -Personal Safety – wear a vapor respirator and nitrile gloves when working with cartridge-based foam fillers. Do not weld near exposed foam filler. Most foam filler is combustible and will begin to melt and/or burn if exposed to heat higher than about 575 degrees Fahrenheit. When cured foam filler begins to melt, it emits toxic chemicals, including carbon monoxide and cyanide gas. The foam filler will also melt when heat is applied during straightening or if studs are welded to be the part for pulling -Foam-Filled Areas – one consideration for working with foam filler is determining the type of foam, such as rigid or semi-rigid. The vehicle maker may not specify the type of foam. In this instance, the technician may have to make a determination based on the physical characteristics of the original material. Note: Structural foam may be used in some locations. Follow vehicle maker recommendations for replacement -Foam Preservation – it may be helpful to preserve foam fillers. If foam is inside the part, it may be beneficial to try and preserve the shape and integrity of the original foam material when separating panels or assemblies. In some instances, the foam piece can be reinstalled by bonding it back in place. Note: Some replacement parts come from the vehicle maker with foam filler installed -Foam Reinstallation – another consideration for working with foam filler includes reinstalling it if removed. If the foam filler is directly behind a welded joint, it is replaced following the welding process. This is done through an access hole. Foam filler may also be applied after corrosion protection is applied. Make sure the foam filler is removed from the weld zone before welding. Foam is flammable and will burn if ignited from the heat of the welding process -Determining What Is Inside – vehicle maker service information may identify additional internal baffles, support adhesives, or other materials that will require replacement following the service procedure. There are some vehicle makers that do not identify these materials, so the technician will need to evaluate and identify appropriate replacement materials during part replacement -Working With a Previously Replaced Part – working with a previously replaced part that was welded with GMA plug welds -Is usually more difficult than replacing an original part, because plug welds are more difficult to remove than spot welds. The weld metal is usually harder than the surrounding steel, and the welds are difficult to locate because they have been dressed. -May require grinding the edge and working inward to see where the plug welds are located -Is challenging because there is even less space than before for replacement welds -Note: Another way to locate the plug weld sites is to separate the flanges and look for an outline of the plug welds to appear -Replacing the Inner or Outer Rail Half – often, the inner and outer halves of a part are available as separate parts. An example is an inner and outer front lower rail, where: -The inner or outer half can be ordered and used separately when only one half needs replacing -If only the outer half is being replaced, it may not be necessary to remove the engine and transmission -Spot welds are removed from the side that will be replaced -Care is taken to not drill into reinforcements or the other half when removing the spot welds -Note: Replacing only one half may permit straightening otherwise inaccessible damage on the remaining half -Tubular Reinforcements – tubular reinforcements: -Are used in some upper A-pillars, B-pillars, roof rails, and rocker panels -Usually have high-strength tubing with brackets on each end -Are removed by removing welds or bolts in the brackets, and reattached with the same methods -Rail Crush Boxes – crush boxes on rails: -Are sacrificial, separate part extensions of the rail designed to collapse before transferring damage to the rail -May be bolted to the end of the front lower rails and rear rails for easy replacement -May be welded to the bumper reinforcement and replaced as an assembly with the bumper replacement -And may also be called crash boxes or crush caps -Complete Floor Pan – replacement of a complete floor pan: -Is difficult, since most vehicles are built starting with the floor pan -Is highly intrusive, requiring removal of most of the interior -Is installed from under, through the doors, or from the top -May require removal of the front and/or rear frame rails, uniside, roof, or all underbody parts -Requires sealing gaps from exhaust fumes and road spray moisture and chemicals, clearing drain plugs, and replacing floor pan coverings such as sound deadeners and insulating pads -Working with Floor Crossmembers – floor crossmembers: -May be on top or under the floor pan -Are usually separate parts, but may be part of the floor assembly -Are also likely damaged and require replacement is the floor pan is being replaced after a side collision -Separating an Assembly – even if a vehicle maker has a general position on disassembling an assembly, there are exceptions. Also, if the vehicle maker does not say anything, there are considerations for determining whether a part can be disassembled from an assembly -Considerations – considerations for determining whether a part can be disassembled from an assembly include: -Whether the part will be damaged due to layering or another reason that limits access to where it is attached -The type or strength of steels, as there may be special recommendations for UHSS -The presence of reinforcements, plastic inserts, or foam fillers -Whether the joining method can be duplicated -Avoiding Part Damage – this what you need to know to determine if a portion can be removed without damage -Is there a factory seam? If not, it is not even a possibility, as this would be sectioning without a procedure. This is no longer practical -If there are to be no holes, because the part will be attached using spot welding, is there access to the backside of the flanges -Could the unused part be cut away, if necessary, for access to the backside -Is there layering that would pose a problem for part removal without damage -Is the part attached with just spot welds? If there is a laser weld or a GMA weld, it may require too much grinding to separate -Stepped Plug Welds – making stepped plug welds when there are more than two thicknesses: -Is done where a spot welder cannot access both sides of the multiple panel location -Requires plug weld holes to be drilled or punched progressively larger, from the inner to the outermost layer. This helps assure proper penetration between the layers -For example, on a three-layered joint, the first hole on the middle piece should be based on the thickness of the steel, for example, 6 mm (1/4 inch) on 20 gauge material. The hole on the outermost piece is then one size larger – 8mm (3/8 inch) in this example -Note: Check vehicle maker service information for specific hole size recommendations -Dressing Welds – dressing welds gives the repair its finished appearance. When dressing welds: -Make sure it is done in visible areas -Do not grind to the point where the metal is thinner than the adjacent metal -Do not grind into the base metal, as this will weaken the joint -Note: Some vehicle makers may recommend using dye penetrant to check for cracks in the weld after dressing the weld Part Replacement at Factory Seams (2/2) Full Frame Preparation -Service Parts – some vehicle makers make full-frames with a number of serviceable parts. Replacement service parts may include crossmembers, body mounts, brackets, mounting flanges, and some side rails -Crush Boxes and Bumper Mounting Brackets – design features for collision energy management in full-frame construction include: -Bolt-on crush boxes that are designed to be replaced in low-speed front impacts -Bumper mounting brackets, which are often available as separate service parts -Note: These features absorb collision energy, similar to the front portion of a unibody structure -Front/Rear Module Frame Tip and Assemblies – if a damaged part cannot be repaired, the decision must be made for either full or partial replacement. Vehicle maker recommendations and part availability will also affect this decision. Many vehicle makers have front frame kits available for collision repairs. Rear frame kits may also be available. Some of the options include: -Varied partial replacement locations depending on the service parts provided -Frame tips or ends, usually in front of a crossmember. The front-end service part may include a crush zone and body mount -Front or rear assemblies that include not only one, but both front rail ends and a crossmember -Body Mount Replacement Considerations – when determining replacement options for damaged frame mounting areas, verify if the vehicle maker provides a service part. If the part is not available as a separate service part, replacement of a major part of the frame, if not the entire frame, may be the only option. Replacement procedures for frame mounting areas and crossmembers are rare. If there is no replacement procedure, duplicate the original factory attachment method -Accessing Area – depending on the part being replaced, it may require lifting the body slightly for access, or complete removal of the body to complete the procedure. There may be mechanical parts, lines, hoses, wire harnesses, heat shields, or other parts that require removal for access to complete the repair -Frame Thickness – frames are typically thicker than most unibody parts. For example, exterior unibody panels typically measure around 0.8 mm thick. Unibody frame rails and reinforcements can measure up to 1.75 mm thick. Full-frame rails on light-duty pickup trucks and SUVs commonly measure 3-4 mm thick, and can be much thicker on heavy-duty trucks. If not specified by the vehicle maker, it is a good practice to measure the thickness of the part to be welded to ensure the proper welding equipment and settings are used -Beveling Edges of Joints – to prepare the welding area, bevel the joint areas if recommended. Typical bevel angles are between 25 to 45 degrees. A bevel may be recommended for both the existing and replacement part, or just the existing part. A root gap may or may not be recommended. Leaving a root gap and beveling are designed to ensure penetration into the backside or the insert when welding thick steel Frame Welding Considerations -Welding Equipment for Frames – it is important to make sure that you have the correct and necessary equipment and materials capable of welding full-frames -Welding Wire – procedures may specify ER70S-3 electrode wire for frame repairs instead of ER70S-6; both have a tensile strength of 70,000 psi, or 382 megapascals (MPa). The difference is the “3”, which indicates the chemical makeup of the wire. The molten puddle solidifies quicker than ER70S-6, which is good for vertical and overhead welds. ER70S-3 has fewer deoxidizers than ER70S-6, resulting in a bead that is not as smooth as ER70S-6, but this is usually not an issue on frame parts. If the vehicle maker does not specific an electrode wire, either can be used. When welding full frame materials, the electrode wire diameter must be capable of supporting the required current, 0.9 mm (.035 inch) wire is recommended when welding in the 75 to 250 amp range. It is a good practice to verify the welder is equipped with the proper electrode wire for the job. Frame Module Replacement -Frame Tip Replacement – some vehicle makers service frame tips. -Frame Modules – some vehicle makers service replacement front and rear frame modules in addition to the entire frame assembly -Front/Rear Replacement – when replacing a front or rear replacement module, the center section will either overlap or underlap the front and rear sections. Caution must be taken to avoid cutting into the center section frame metal when removing the damaged section and original welds. Grinding away the original weld must be done with care. If initial cuts are made, ensure there is no damage to the center section -Benefit – a benefit to replacing a front or rear module, as opposed to replacing an entire frame assembly, is the original VIN of the frame remains with the vehicle. There are at least four states – Texas, Louisiana, Arizona, and Oregon – that have statutes requiring rebranding of the titles of repaired vehicles in which a major part containing a permanent VIN tag or stamp is replaced. It is also important that the vehicle owner and insurer understand, and agree, which replacement method will be used -Frame Module Replacement Preparation – before replacement of any full-frame part or module, it is important to verify the rest of the frame is dimensionally correct, and any pulling or straightening operations need to be completed before the replacement part is welded in place. -Removal – there are a variety of mechanical and suspension operations required to complete the front module replacement, which may include, but are not limited to, separating the body, and support and/or removing the engine and transmission, suspension, and steering parts, as well as a variety of other items identified in the vehicle service information -Installation – to install the front frame module: -Temporarily clamp the replacement frame module into place and measure to verify it is in the correct position. Tightly clamp the part into position once dimensional accuracy has been verified. -Weld completely around the factory joints -Apply corrosion protection and reassemble all suspension, steering, mechanicals, and body, as required. A wheel alignment will be required. ADAS systems may require calibration depending on vehicle options -Rear Frame Module – following vehicle maker procedures, the replacement of a rear frame module can be done if there is a kink or other damage that cannot be repaired in the rear section. The factory seams is typically located rearward of the cab on a pick up, requiring only the removal of the bed assembly. There will be a variety of other parts that require disconnecting or removal which may include but, is not limited to the rear bumper, trailer hitch, rear axle, fuel tank, suspension, and exhaust. Some parts may remain in position during the module replacement only requiring disconnect and reconnect, as well as support during the module replacement -Removal – to remove the rear frame module: -The welded joint where the frame modules attach may have welded reinforcement brackets that require removal by grinding the welds away -After removal of the reinforcing brackets, grind off the lap welds around the factory seams and remove the rear frame section, or remaining pieces if initial cuts were made -Grind off excess welding material from the center section of the rail that is not being replaced -Note: If the reinforcement brackets are damaged and being replaced, it may be more efficient to cut the rear module off, ensuring you are behind the center section rail overlap area to reduce the weld grinding required to remove the brackets -Installation – to install the rear frame module: -1) Clean all coatings from weld areas, leaving zinc coatings intact -2) If specified by the vehicle maker, apply weld-through primer to all weld surfaces. Clamp the replacement frame module into place and measure to verify it is in the correct position, adjust as required, and verify measurements -3) Remove weld-through primer from the immediate weld area -4) Weld to duplicate the factory joints. The vehicle maker may have a weld diagram of the sequence to complete welds -5) If required, install the reinforcement brackets in the original locations. Inspect for weld defects and cracks with dye penetrant -6) Apply corrosion protection -7) Reassemble other removed parts, and perform a wheel alignment -8) Ensure ADAS calibrations are completed as applicable Performing an Initial Vehicle Inspection (1/2) Vehicle Inspection -Preparing for Initial Customer Contact – when preparing for an initial, vehicle-owner consultation and vehicle inspection, determine if the owner is the insured or claimant. Then, review both the insurance policy and facts-of-loss information provided in the claim file. If the vehicle owner is the insured, reviewing the policy beforehand can be particularly important to understand the policy coverages, limits, exclusions, and any special endorsements. This preparation is necessary to address any questions the vehicle owner may have -Why Perform an Initial Vehicle Inspection? – the initial vehicle inspection is performed to allow the insurance company to make decisions on things like repair versus total loss. In addition, depending on the insurance company and the state in which the claim is located, the company may set reserves to cover the repairs while the vehicle is moved to a repair shop and torn down for further inspection. Reserves are typically set when the carrier initially opens the claim in their system. This inspection may occur at the owner’s residence, place of business, or a drive-in facility if the vehicle is still drivable. If the vehicle is not drivable, the inspection may be performed at a towing facility or repair shop -Insurance and Collision Repair – when reviewing insurance policy information, there are a few common terms you need to understand -Deductibles – auto insurance polies, both collision and comprehensive, may include a deductible. This is the amount that the policyholder is responsible for paying toward an insured loss. The deductible should be verified before contacting the vehicle owner or inspecting the vehicle. The owner may require an explanation of the deductible. Explaining the deductible ensures that owners understand their payment responsibility. Furthermore, it avoids any confusion when the repairs are completed, and the vehicle is ready for delivery. Deductibles are specified in most policies. The insured assumes the loss up to the limit of the deductible. Then, the insurance company pays the amount over the deductible up to the policy limit -Insurance Coverage – collision insurance covers damage to a policyholder’s vehicle due to a collision. Comprehensive polices cover damage to a policyholder’s vehicle that is not related to the collision. The term claimant refers to a vehicle owner making a claim against another’s insurance company. there is no deductible for the claimant -Policy Exclusions and Limits – some insurance polices have items that will not be covered in the event of a loss. These items are typically listed in the exclusions section of the policy. These risks may include: -Deliberate acts -Maintenance issues -Illegal modifications -Customer modifications -Note: Most policies have limits to the amount to which the insurer will be held accountable -Consultation and Inspection Setup – opening the lines of communication with the customer is one of the initial steps in the claims process. It is at this point that you interview the customer and gather any information to be used throughout the repair process. Asking the customer questions about the collision and the vehicle damage often reveals important details that may otherwise be missed. For example, when asked about the collision, the customer might note that the vehicle was in DRIVE, stopped at a light when hit, and that a passenger spilled coffee on the carpet. When discussing damage located away from the point of collision, the customer might indicate that there was previous damage to the hood, roof, left rear door, and left rocker panel molding -Empathy – the initial interview establishes the relationship and can help build trust with customers. When making your initial customer contact, it is important to show empathy. Remember that vehicle owners have gone through a traumatic experience, and their first impression of you could influence their entire claim experience -Initial Customer Consultation – some discussion points for your initial consultation with the vehicle owner include the following: -Review the facts of loss -Review the initial inspection and claims process -Confirm the location of the damage and ask the vehicle owner if there are any other drivability issues -Confirm the vehicle location -If the vehicle is with the owner, confirm the best time for the initial inspection. Ensure that the owner will be available to provide access to the vehicle and keys -If the vehicle is not with the owner, inquire if the owner would like to be present when you inspect the vehicle -Review the policyholder deductible, if applicable -Ask if the vehicle owner has any questions -Obtain Information about the collision – collision information obtained during a customer consultation includes: -The impact source -The speed of the impact -The road conditions at the time of the collision -Brake usage during the collision -The seat belts used. Some vehicle makers recommend replacing seat belts that were in use during the collision -Whether or not the vehicle was drivable or was towed after the collision -Note: knowing what the vehicle hit, or was hit by, aids in evaluating the potential for energy transfer through the vehicle. There is a difference in the amount of energy transferred when hitting another vehicle versus a stationary object, such as a tree -Documenting Vehicle Owner Contact – any time there is communication with the vehicle owner, the event should be documented with the: -Date and time the communication took place -Purpose of the communication -Name of the person who received the communication on the part of the customer -Communication type such as phone, text, or email, including the phone number or email address used -Note: Detailed communication records help to eliminate any confusion about the issue that required the communication. This can reduce or eliminate conflict situations Performing an Initial Vehicle Inspection (2/2) Performing an Initial Inspection -Vehicle Access – gaining access to damaged vehicles can sometimes be a challenge. It is important that you have adequate vehicle access when performing the initial inspection. You need access to all damaged areas and enough distance around the vehicle to obtain the necessary photo documentation. For example, if the vehicle is located against a wall or in a snowbank, request that the vehicle be relocated -Vehicle Information – during the initial inspection, it is important to collect the necessary vehicle information to confirm you are inspecting the correct vehicle. Ensure you have all the trim and options information to allow for accurate parts selection when you prepare the repair estimate. When identifying a vehicle, record the: -Vehicle identification number (VIN) -Make and model of the vehicle -Model year and production date, which may be important for parts ordering -Mileage -Body style, such as two-door, four-door, convertible, truck, SUV, or van -Additional Vehicle Information – additional vehicle information should include: -License number -Body color, as well as the vehicle maker’s paint code -Any available trim codes -Drivetrain information – this includes identifying the engine type, size, and the transmission type -Vehicle options – this includes power windows, locks, sunroofs, and cruise control among others. Vehicle options must be correctly identified because they often determine the required procedures or parts -VIN Plates – VIN plates are typically located on the instrument panel or cowl top and are visible through the lower left corner of the windshield. The VIN may also be located on the a-pillar, b-pillar, driver’s door, or driver’s front door jamb -Vehicle Condition – other valuable information that may be obtained during the initial inspection includes: -Any temporary repairs that were done after the collision -Any warning lamps that illuminated since the collision -Identifying any inoperative accessories -Visual cues, such as debris removed from the wheels, suspension, or underbody -Inspecting a Vehicle for Damage – when performing the vehicle inspection, it is important to look for direct, indirect, related, and unrelated damage -Vehicle Damage – direct damage is caused by direct damage with another object. A buckle away from the area of direct impact is considered indirect damage is caused by collision-energy transfer. Initial inspections may also reveal unrelated prior damage. This type of vehicle damage is not in the same area as the other direct and indirect damage -Related Prior Damage – there could also be related prior damage, which is pre-existing damage on a panel that also sustained damage related to the current loss. For example, a vehicle may have been in an accident involving left rear damage a week prior to your inspection. That damage resulted in an estimate to replace the rear bumper cover and repair the left quarter panel. Before the repairs could take place, the same vehicle was in a second accident involving right rear damage. This second set of damage requires replacement of the rear bumper cover and right quarter panel. The rear bumper cover replacement already included on the repair estimate for the first loss would be considered related prior damage for the current claim -Using Visual Cues – When looking at visual clues to identify signs of potential structure damage, note that these should only be used as guides. They should never be used as the only method to determine structural damage. However, visual clues can be used as evidence that structural three-dimensional measuring must be done. In most cases, structural misalignment problems are generally evident, but in some instances, measuring may be the only practical method to determine if structural damage exists -Photo Documentation – when performing an initial vehicle inspection, photograph the vehicle condition and all visible damage to the vehicle -Required Photos – some of the required photos may include: -Four corner photos, showing the license plate on the rear corners -Damage height measurement photos -Close-up photos of the damage -Interior photos -Instrument panel photos, showing radio and GPS options -Driver door panel photos, showing power options -Headliner and sunroof photos -Engine compartment photos -Tread depth measurement photos, showing all tires -Prior damage photos -Visual Documentation – the primary reason for taking photos of a damaged vehicle is to provide visual documentation of the damage. The photo document process also: -Provides a reference for the auto physical damage appraiser (APDA) should they need to review the vehicle after damage has been repaired -Creates a portfolio of the damage to support the written document -May be used for subrogation, litigation, arbitration, or investigative purposes -May be used to determine the possibility of injury severity -When combined with the proper documentation, can reduce or eliminate fraudulent behavior from any of the parties involved -Safety Issues – when performing an initial inspection, look closely to identify any damage to safety and mechanical systems that may make the vehicle unsafe or illegal to drive. The following are examples of safety items that, if damaged, may put the driver or passengers in potentially dangerous situations: -Airbags -Seat belt pre-tensioners -Braking systems -ADAS features such as adaptive cruise control, lane keeping assist, and automatic emergency braking -Note: Furthermore, broken or inoperable headlamps, turn signals, tail lamps, brake lamps, or glass could make the vehicle illegal to drive -Mechanical Issues – examples of mechanical issues include damage to the following items: -Cooling systems -Suspension system -Brake system, including pads, rotors, and lines -Steering system, including the tie rod and tie rod ends -Note: Ignoring these mechanical issues can sometimes create additional damage from driving the vehicle. In some severe instances, the mechanical damage can even be a risk to others on the road -Inspecting Restraints and Malfunction Indicator Lamps – inspect the restraint systems for proper operation and signs of damage. Make sure that recommendations for restraint system operation meet vehicle maker requirements and include all OEM mandatory repairs. Check the instrument panel for illuminated malfunction indicator lamps (MIL). Verify the seat belt is functional and the SRS lamp does not remain lit or blink when the vehicle is running. Remember to consult the vehicle maker’s service requirements to identify mandatory, restraint system replacement items and pre-and post-repair scan requirements -Discussing Drivability – if there is damage that makes the vehicle unsafe or illegal to drive. It is recommended that you go over the problem with the vehicle owner. Explain that driving the vehicle poses a significant safety risk -Customer Drivability Recommendations – when determined that the vehicle is unsafe to driver, recommend that the owner park the vehicle or offer to have it towed to a repair facility. Having the vehicle towed helps reduce liability, as the owner was provided an option other than driving the vehicle. Regardless of which option is chosen, it is important to document this conversation with the vehicle owner. If the owner chooses to continue driving the vehicle, have the owner sign a form that the discussion took place with recommendations to protect the safety of the driver and any passengers Post Repair Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) Testing Purpose -ADAS Post Repair Tests – performing post repair tests will confirm proper system operation. Systems that are not operating properly may not set a malfunction indicator lamp (MIL). Many people are purchasing vehicles because they are equipped with driver assistance features. When a driver knows these systems are on a vehicle, they are also relying on them to function properly and help keep them safe. System Identification -System Verification – prior to test driving the vehicle, it’s imperative that you are familiar with each of the systems the vehicle is equipped with and ensure that the systems are active, An understanding of these systems is also required to properly inspect, diagnose, and repair them. For example, some system tests will require favorable weather or good road conditions. Others require both. Always abide by state an local traffic laws while performing a test drive. When preparing for post repair ADAS testing, the owner’s manual may provide good information about settings and proper operation. -Establishing Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) – it is important to establish standard operating procedures (SOPs) when performing post repair ADAS tests. Some examples include standard testing procedures, test drive routes, and test documentation. In addition, these SOPs should always include referring vehicle maker service procedures. ADAS Testing -Considerations - when performing post repair ADAS test, consider the following -Systems may be activated through an infotainment screen or a button -Vehicles may require the driver to turn the system back on after it has been manually disabled -ADAS icons vary in appearance -Vehicles may need to be driven at or above a specific speed to activate some ADAS -Even after being manually disabled, some systems will be able to reactive themselves if the system senses a need to assist -Cautions – it is important to be safe, cautious, and aware of all situations you put yourself, the vehicle, and other people in while performing post repair ADAS testing. If ADAS is not calibrated correctly, it may not respond properly during post repair testing. - Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) – the adaptive cruise control (ACC) system should -Detect the presence and speed of any forward vehicle -Automatically maintain a set distance from a vehicle ahead -Have braking and accelerating occur without driver intervention -Testing Procedure – testing the adaptive cruise control will require you to test drive the vehicle. It is important to identify a location with light-to-moderate traffic. This test can alaos be done with an assistant in a lead vehicle. When road testing an ACC system, some system checks include proper function of: -Distance settings. Most vehicles have several different distance settings -Cruise Control speed adjust up -Cruise Control speed adjust down -Note: ACC system capabilities may be different from one vehicle to another. Always reference vehicle maker service information to review any available system functionality and testing procedures. - Blind Spot Monitoring – the blind spot monitoring system should -Engage when the turn signal is activated -Illuminate any time a vehicle is in the area that the sensor is monitoring -Gauge the distance of approaching vehicles using radar -Sound an audible alert if the turn signal is turned on or the vehicle starts to drift out of the lane when an object has been detected -Ignore stationary objects -Note: System capabilities vary on different vehicles -Testing Procedure – the blind spot detection system will require a test drive in a location with light-to-moderate traffic. The test can also be performed with an assistant in a follow vehicle. When road testing, some systems check include confirming: -Approaching vehicles from the rear are detected by the blind spot monitoring system -That stationary objects do not trigger a blind spot alert -When testing the system, it is important to test the functionality on both the left and right sides of the vehicle - Lane Departure Warning and Lane Keep Assist – the lane departure warning (LDW) system may provide audio, visual, or steering wheel vibrations to warn the driver if they are drifting out of the lane. The lane keep assist (LKA) should alert the driver with similar audio and visual alerts and also nude the vehicle back into the lane if the driver does not react. When the turn signal is activated, it deactivates the LKA and LDW. -Testing Procedure – lane departure warning and lane keep assist both typically require a test drive on a road with clearly defined center and shoulder liners. Ensure there is no oncoming traffic and there is adequate room along the shoulder. The four tests done with the repaired vehicle on the road are: -Left change with no turn signal -Right change with no turn signal -Left change with turn signal -Right change with turn signal -When performing each of these tests, confirm the appropriate audible and visual alerts function properly. For vehicles with a LKA system, confirm the system nudges the vehicle back into the lane as appropriate. - Cross-Traffic Alert – the cross-traffic alert system should notify the driver of oncoming traffic when backing out of a parking space. It uses an audible alert from the parking aid speaker and a visual alert on the right or left door mirror. The system may also provide a message on the instrumental panel cluster or infotainment screen. -Note: some systems may automatically apply the brakes -Testing Procedure- Cross-traffic alert testing can be performed in a parking lot. The test requires a secondary vehicle to approach while the repaired vehicle is in reverse. When testing this system, verify the system on both the left and right sides of the vehicle is functioning properly. - Backup Stop Assist – the backup stop assist system should: -Sense objects in a vehicle’s path when backing up -Warn using an audible beep and visual indicators depending on the vehicle -Automatically apply the brakes -Note: This test can be performed in a parking lot and requires a stationary object behind the vehicle. When performing this test, make sure: -To use an object that is unlikely to cause any damage to the vehicle if the system fails -The vehicle stops within the designated distance -To depress the brake pedal if the system fails - 360-degree Surround View – the 360 degree surround view -Provides drivers a 360-degree view surrounding their vehicle -Uses multiple cameras in different locations around the vehicle -Feeds visual information from the cameras into the infotainment system, showing a representation of the vehicle -Note: this test can be performed indoors or outdoors and should include inspection to ensure the images are stitched together correctly, in focus, with no overlap or gaps - Rearview Cameras – the rearview cameras should provide a view of the area behind the vehicle when the vehicle is in reverse. The test for this system can be performed indoors or outdoors. After placing the vehicle in reverse, confirm the image is properly focused. It is also important to note that some vehicles may provide a backup grid on the screen to help the driver determine the path of the vehicle while in reverse. When these directional pivot lines are present, it is necessary to ensure the lines turn appropriately as the steering wheel is turned. - Collision Warning/Braking – many emergency warning and braking systems are designed to provide a warning, preload the brakes, and even bring the vehicle to a complete stop. If there is not proper equipment for testing, the tests should not be performed. If testing, first verify that all other ADAS are calibrated and functioning. Place an air wall in an open area and ensure the technician is ready to depress the brake pedal in the event of a system failure. Audible, visual, or haptic feedback may occur with braking within the designated distance. - Park Assist and Active Park – a park assist system should -Provide visual feedback, audio feedback, or a combination of the two to help determine the distance to obstacles. -Correctly use sensors embedded in front, rear, or both bumpers -Note: Active park assist -Is available on some vehicles -Uses cameras and sensors to determine if there is enough room for a vehicle to park between two cars -Allows the vehicle to park itself with some driver assistance -Testing Procedure – perform active park assist and park assist testing in a parking lot. Park assist requires a single stationary object. Active park assist requires two stationary objects spaced to allow for parallel parking. To test park assist, slowly move the vehicle toward the stationary object to confirm you receive the proper alerts. It is important to test this system with the stationary object in front and rear of the vehicle to ensure the sensors on both ends of the vehicle are functioning properly. Active park assist verifies that the vehicle identifies the available parking space, alerts the driver to stop, and tells the driver to put the vehicle in reverse. Then, the driver controls the brake pedal while the system steers the vehicle into the parking space. It is important to be prepared to take control of the steering if either of these systems fail. Also, ensure the stationary objects being used will not cause damage to the vehicle in the event of system failure Documentation and Communication -Deactivation of ADAS – in some cases, the vehicle maker may allow the driver to manually deactivate ADAS features. It’s important to know which systems automatically reactive with the next key cycle and those that may need to be manually reactivated. For example, some vehicles allow the driver to disable the park assist warning system. These systems may not be active the next time the vehicle is driven unless the driver reactivates the system. -Documentation – it is recommended that you document each of the systems tested and attach them to the repair order. I-CAR has developed a checklist that can be used to document the date, time, location, technician, and each system tested. -Customer Consultation – it is a good practice to return vehicles to your customer with all ADAS active. When you review the results of post repair ADAS testing with your customers, advise them that all systems are currently active. Then, allow them the option to manually disable any ADAS they choose. For example, if the customer preference is for the park assist system to not provide audible alerts when parking, remind them that they will need to deactivate the system. Post Repair Process Final Quality -Preparing for Final Quality Control – After all repairs have been completed and the vehicle is out of the production, there are typically a few post repair tasks remaining, which include -Performing a final quality control inspection -Ensuring all final repair documents are complete and accurate -Coordinating a delivery appointment with the vehicle owner -Note: When preparing for the final quality control inspection, print the final repair estimate so it can be compared line by line to the vehicle to ensure all work documented on the final repair estimate has been completed. -Final Quality Control Inspection – in addition to comparing the final estimate to the completed repairs, closely inspect the vehicle, looking at the small details such as buffing compound in jams, overspray, masking materials, or tools left in the vehicle. These small details can stand between you and a completely satisfied customer. The final quality inspection should also include a test drive, listening for wind noises, rattles, drivability issues, and to confirm all systems and accessories are functioning as designed and to ensure no malfunction indicator lamps (MILs) are illuminated. Verify Final Paperwork -Reconcile Invoices – when the vehicle is in the final stages of production, typically final detail/clean-up, the job file is reconciled to ensure all necessary documents are complete, accurate, and in the file. Some examples of items included in the file reconciliation process may include verifying that: -The final estimate is a complete and accurate reflection of the repair work performed. -All sublet and parts invoices are in the file and the prices on the invoices match the final repair estimate. -All supporting documents, such as alignment reports, frame reports, and vehicle maker repair procedures, are in the file. -All electronic communications have been properly uploaded to the insurance company when appropriate. -Note: When processing a claim involving an insurance direct repair program, there may be very specific electronic upload requirements as well as documents requiring a customer signature. -Additional Documentation – additional considerations for items that should be documented and retained in the job file may include: -Pre and Post scan reports -Technical Data Sheets (TDS) for repair materials used (such as panel bond adhesives, seam sealers, etc.) -Documents verifying the materials and procedures used by sublet vendors, such as windshield or rear glass replacement -Note: It is always helpful to fully document all repairs, materials, and procedures used to complete repairs so they are available for future reference in the event of a warranty claim -Preparing the Final Bill – there are many different options available to repair shops for preparing a final repair invoice for the customer. The important thing is that the document used as the final repair bill provides an itemized summary of all repairs completed and the expenses related to each of those repairs. In addition, the final repair bill should include the shop name, address, phone number, and name of the estimator or person assigned as the contact person. -Note: Always reference local and state laws to identify required disclaimers, shop identification information, and any other information that may be legally required to appear on the final repair bill. Vehicle Delivery -Coordinating a Delivery Appointment – another step in the post repair process is scheduling a delivery appointment with the vehicle owner. In some shops, this may not occur until the file has been reconciled and the final quality control inspection has been completed. In other shops, this may be done as soon as the vehicle enters the final detail/clean up department -Check for Rental Car – when preparing to contact the customer to schedule a delivery appointment, it is a good practice to review the job file notes to determine if the customer has a rental car that will need to be returned. This will allow you to update the rental car company of the scheduled return of the rental vehicle, and you should remind the customer to remove any personal belongings and fill the fuel tank before bringing the vehicle back, if required as part of their rental agreement. -Prepare Shop and Insurance Warranties – in preparation for the delivery appointment, it is also a good practice to prepare all warranty and vehicle car instructions that will be provided to the customer. This may include the shop repair warranty, insurance company repair warranty, direction of payment form, etc. -Note: Depending on shop SOP’s or any insurance partner DRP requirements, there may be additional documents to be prepared for the customer or for the customer to sign. -Contact Customer to Coordinate Delivery – when contacting the customer to schedule a delivery appointment, it is a good practice to check the calendar for the staff member responsible for delivering the vehicle to the customer. This ensures the staff member is available to serve the customer upon arrival without keeping them waiting. It is also a good practice to let the customer know the delivery process may take between 20-30 minutes so they can plan accordingly. -Delivery – delivering the vehicle is not simply a matter of handing the customer the keys. It may be your last chance to make a good impression on the customer by providing exceptional customer service, spending the time necessary to review the high-quality work performed on their vehicle, and making sure they are completely satisfied. -Presenting the Repaired Vehicle – when the customer arrives to take delivery of their vehicle, it is a good practice, after greeting the customer, to walk around the vehicle and review the estimate and highlight the completed repairs. This is an opportunity for you to put your repair quality in the spotlight by remind your customer of the repairs that were required and the commitment your shop has to providing high quality repairs. For example, point out any special features of the repair, color matching, panel alignment, etc. that make it appear as though the vehicle has never been damaged. -Review Paperwork – after you have finished your walk around and review of the completed repairs, it is time to review all of the final documents with the customer. For example, review the warranty documents, post repair vehicle care instructions, and any alignment reports or sublet repair documents, such as instructions following a recent windshield installation. -Explain Upcoming CSI – the vehicle delivery process also provides an opportunity for you to explain the CSI survey calls your customer will be receiving and to remind them of your commitment to ensuring they are completely satisfied and your desire to receive a perfect score. It is a good practice to review some of the key questions your customer will be asked and let them know if that, at any time, they feel they would not be willing to give you a perfect score, to please let you know so you can work to address their concerns immediately. It is also a good idea, if an insurance company was involved in the repairs, to let the customer know they may receive more than one survey call, as the insurance company may perform their own CSI survey. -Payment Settlements – the final repair bill may be paid in a number of ways depending on the parties involved in the repair process. For example, if an insurance company that is not part of a DRP relationship is involved, the customer will likely have a check from the insurance company to sign over to the shop to cover the cost of the repairs. If the repair involves an insurance company, and the vehicle owner is insured by the insurance company involved, it is likely there will be a deductible the customer will be responsible for, and it will need to be collected from the customer in addition to the check from the insurance company. -Note: If supplemental damages were found after the initial check was provided to the customer, the customer may need to sign additional documents (such as Direction of Payment (DOP)) so the insurance company can pay the shop directly for the supplemental repairs. Customer Follow-Up -Post Repair Follow-Up – following the vehicle delivery, contact the customer to make sure they are happy with the repair and their experience. This may be your very last chance to make things right, if necessary, before the CSI call. The CS survey company will typically call the customer within 30 days of delivery and ask the customer to rate your shop in several areas. Typically, these include quality and timeliness of communication, time to repair, quality of repair, friendliness, and overall experience. CSI -CSI Reports – CSI survey companies typically provide monthly reports that summarize the customer satisfaction scores based on the customer surveys completed during the designated survey period. In some cases, the CSI survey company may provide individual reports for each survey as they are completed in advance of the monthly summary reports. It is a good practice to closely monitor these individual reports to identify trends that may need to be addressed quickly to correct a customer service issues. -Communication CSI Results – in addition to monitoring individual survey results, it is a good practice to review the monthly summary reports with the entire staff to review customer feedback, identify opportunities for improvement, and celebrate the things that are going well. For instance, if communication is scored low, check to see how often you are talking to the customer and if the information provided during those calls is meaningful. You may find that customers are being contacted on a schedule following shop standard operation procedures, but the information provided during those status updates is not providing a meaningful update to the customers. Priming and Blocking Repaired Areas (1/3) Primers and Their Uses -Primer Coatings – primer coatings include epoxy, self-etching, primer-surfacer, and primer-sealer. Primer coatings must be applied to a cleaned surface. If there is no access for mechanical and chemical cleaning, primers will not adhere to the surface -Epoxy Primer – epoxy primer is a corrosion-inhibiting undercoat applied to a vehicle surface before applying finish coats. Epoxy primer may require an etching base, or can be applied direct to metal. An etching base is a two-step process of applying a metal cleaner and conversion coating, which chemically etches the surface. This process is most often done on restoration projects, rather than in production repair facilities. -Wash and Self-Etching Primers – self-etching primer is a corrosion-inhibiting undercoat containing phosphoric acid. The phosphoric acid etches into the surface to promote adhesion to bare metal, and neutralizes the surface area as it dries. When applied, self-etching primer leaves a thin layer that must be coated with additional primer because self-etching primers do not form a barrier like epoxy primers and would eventually break down. Self-etching primer may be applied in one or two parts, and must be flashed to ensure the acid will not react to additional coatings. Water primers are a form of self-etching primer that are even thinner. Applying water primers too thickly may inhibit the cure. * Self-etching primer is also available in various forms, including aerosol or a pen applicator. -Direct-to-Metal Primers – direct-to-metal primers are a two-part material that can be applied directly to a bare metal surface, and work similar to a self-etching or epoxy primer. Some may be used as a sealer or a surfacer, depending on how the primer is reduced. There is no need to apply a separate primer and sealer because the direct-to-metal primer works as both. The following paint makers have a primer that may either be applied to a bare metal surface or to an E-coated surface: -Axalta -PPG -Sherwin Williams -Akzo Nobel -Glasurit -Adhesion-Promoting Primer – adhesion promoters may be required to be used on some bare plastic parts by some paint makers. They are generally applied to properly prepared plastic parts. They are typically required on polyolefin plastics. -Waterborne Primers – some waterborne primers include primer-surfacers and primer-sealers -Primer-Surfacers – when working with primer-surfacers, surface preparation is key. Make sure the panel surface is properly cleaned and sanded, generally using P180-P320 grit, depending on the product maker’s recommendations and surface type (body filler, refinished panel, or bare steel). Paint makers may recommend a surface prep, such as etch primer, before applying a primer-surfacer. Generally, 1-3 coats of primer-surfacer is acceptable, with a flash time between each coat. Recommended film thickness varies. Some product makers recommend 1.6-1.8 mils, while another recommends 2.0-2.5 mils. -Primer-Sealers – for most primer-sealers, one medium wet coat is acceptable with a film build of 0.5 – 1.5 mils. If a second coat is desired, make sure the first coat has flashed before application. Always reference product maker data sheets for application requirements. -Application – for application of primer-surfacers or primer-sealers, inlet air pressure of 35-45 PSI on conventional spray guns is fairly common, and around 30 PSI for high volume low pressure (HVLP) (around 10 PSI at the air cap). Be sure to refer to the product maker’s technical data sheet for specific recommendations. Drying time for primer-surfacers or primer-sealers depends on the drying method – air dry, forced dry (heat), or infrared -Waterborne Primers Usage Considerations – waterborne primers may be able to be applied to bare steel, or used as a barrier coat. When applying to bare steel, the surface is cleaned with a wax and grease remover. If an etching primer is used, do no apply the waterborne basecoat on top of the etching primer. A primer-sealer should be applied over the top of the etch primer. Depending on the paint system being used, waterborne primers may be tintable. If a waterborne basecoat is being applied, a waterborne primer is not required, as long as the materials being applied are compatible within the specific system. * Use tack clothes that are compatible with the waterborne products you are using. This may be indicated by the product maker or the paint manufacturer -UV Primers – UV primer changes from liquid to solid when exposed to UV light. It takes place at the molecular level. Photo initiators are exposed to a V-A light, which causes them to undergo a chemical reaction, which causes them fragment. These fragments then combine with the resin molecules and begin polymerization and cross-linking reactions. This process turns the resin into a hard, dry coating -Purpose of Sealers – sealer, or primer-sealer, is designed to provide a uniform, even foundation for the basecoat and clearcoat. Sealer can aid with improving color holdout and long-term appearance. Good color holdout prevents primer spots from showing through the basecoat. This can occur because the sealer stops the basecoat from penetrating into the substrate. Additionally, sealer enhances corrosion protection due to the added film thickness and, in general, acts as a cushion. Areas that are prone to chipping should have sealer applied. Some examples of these areas include rocker panels, the front of fenders, and the front of the hood. * Sealer is not designed to cover up surface flaws, such as sandscratches, nor is recommended for use on large areas of bare metal. -When to Use Sealers – sealers are used any time there is a new E-coated part, as the part surface is hard and fully cured, making it more difficult for materials to adhere. Sealers provide a new coating surface that helps with adhesion of the basecoat. Sealers are also used for improved hiding or coverage of the basecoat. Sealers are available in different colors, and may also be tintable to match the basecoat being applied over the sealer. Tintable sealer is typically light gray or transparent, and may have toners added to make a specific color. This also creates a better color match to the OEM sealer color when refinishing a complete panel. * While the sealer is not normally wet when basecoat is applied, it has not fully cured, allowing the basecoat to melt into the sealer to some degree -Urethane Primer-Surfacer/Primer-Sealer – urethane primer-surfacer or primer-sealer helps level out the surface for topcoat application, and is the last step needed before applying topcoats, or may be the final step for some hidden areas that do not need topcoat. Primer surfacer is typically intended to be sanded before topcoat applicat. Additionally, urethane primer-surfacer or primer-sealer: -May be tinted, which sets a color when using translucent basecoats -May be applied direct-to-metal -May be available as an aerosol, and as an ultraviolet (UV) -cured product -* Do not expose eyes or skin to direct UV light. Use UV safety glasses (polycarbonate) available from the lamp manufacturer. UV lamps get very hot and should be kept away from solvent fumes -Featheredging Process – There are several techniques and aspects of the featheredging process that must be taken into consideration. -Sanding the Repair Area – to featheredge the finish, start over the repair area and work outward. Sand to level out the harsh lines around the repair area and other minor damage. Minor damage may include scratches and nicks. The rough edges in an original finish are tapered to prevent the ridges from showing through the new finish -Sanding Body Filler – if body filler is used in a featheredged area, the filler should not contact the painted surface. Sand before or after body filler application. If the finish is featheredged before body filler is applied, featheredging may also be required after the body filler is sanded to contour. When to featheredge during the repair process is a matter of personal preference. -Sanding Coating Layers – sand until about ¼ - 3/8 inch (6-10mm) of each layer of coating is removed and can be seen. The featheredge should look like a bird’s feather with soft, smooth edges. -Working with Sanding Tools – an orbital or dual-action (DA) sander with a flexible backing pad may be used. Place the sander flat against the surface and taper the paint layers by moving the sander in a cross-cutting pattern. Stop frequently to feel for rough edges -Blending a Featheredge – as a featheredge is worked out into the blend area, the abrasive can be increased in steps of up to P100 grit at a time, up to P500 grit. This allows for the previous grit sandscratches to be removed quickly and effectively. When using sanding material above P500 grit, there can be a jump of up to P200 grit at a time, up to P1000 grit. A P500 grit jump between materials can be used with P1000 grit and above. -Visual Inspection of a Featheredge – featheredging is done to ensure a smooth transition from the repair area to the undamaged area. When inspecting the featheredge, look for -Whether the finish is a basecoat, clearcoat, or tri-coat system -The amount and number of finish coats applied -Whether there is a good finish adhesion -Whether there is acceptable film thickness -Coating Soon-To-Be-Enclosed Areas – due to the cleaning requirement for primer coatings, it may be advantageous, even recommended, to apply primer to portions of a panel that will not be accessible after installation. For example, treat the backsides of quarter panels and other areas that may be difficult to access even with wand applicators -Masking for Primers – when masking before applying primers, spray lines should be soft, as opposed to being harsh. Be sure to mask off the jambs from overspray. Additionally, keep the area as small as possible. The entire panel may not need to be primed. When masking for a blend area, use masking techniques designed for blend areas such as reverse masking Priming and Blocking Repaired Areas (2/3) Priming -Mixing Room – the paint mixing room is designed to be self-ventilating and contain any spills that occur. Mixing rooms must also meet local fire codes, be grounded to avoid sparks and explosions, and have explosion-proof wiring -Understanding Mixing Ratios – most products used for refinishing in the automotive collision repair industry require that they be mixed or reduced. Depending on the type of paint system, there can be different mixing ratios used. 3:1 (top). 3:1:1 (middle). 3:1:10-20% (bottom) -3:1 Mixing Ratio – a 3:1 ratio is taking parts of two products and mixing them together. Examples of this are mixing 3 oz. of one primer and 1 oz. of hardener, or 10.5 oz. of one primer and 3.5 oz. of hardener -3:1:1 Mixing Ratio – a 3:1:1 ratio is taking three products and mixing them together. Examples of this are mixing 3 oz. of primer and 1 oz. of hardener and 1 oz. of reducer, or 10.5 oz. of primer and 3.5 oz. of hardener with 3.5 oz. of reducer -a 1:1:10-20% ratio is taking equal parts of two products and mixing them together. Then, by doing a math equation, figure out from the mixed product how much of the mixed product is 10-20%, and then add that 10-20% quantity of the third product. Examples of this are mixing 1 oz. of paint and 1 oz. of reducer and then 0.1 – 0.2 oz. of atomizing agent, or 15 oz. of paint and 15 oz. of reducer and then 1.5-3.0 oz. of an atomizing agent. -Preparing Refinish Materials – mixing ratio cups, mixing sticks, viscosity cups, and strainers are all important tools needed to create a quality refinish. -Mixing Ratio Cups – mixing ratio cups are used for mixing paint, reducer, and hardener. Mixing ratio cups may have graduated scales on the sides of the cup to aid in proper mixtures. Different mixing ratio cups may have parallel sides. The bottom of the mixing ratio cup should be perpendicular to the sides to help ensure proper mixing is attained. Different mixing ratio cups may have a scale for mixing, with a graduated scale for cups that have nonparallel sides -Mixing Sticks – mixing sticks are available by most paint makers. Paint makers that offer mixing sticks will have the mixing sticks needed to support their mixing formula requirements. When using mixing sticks, guidelines must be followed. When using a mixing stick -Place the stick in a container and follow the appropriate scale -Do not set them at an angle -The scales must be followed exactly -Use containers with non-tapered sides -Use a set of mixing sticks made especially for their ratios -Viscosity Cups – viscosity cups are used to gauge how fast a material can pass through a given size orifice. This will then determine the spray gun setup that is needed. There are different types of viscosity cups. Be sure to use the correct cup for the application requirements. Different types of viscosity cups may be able to be interchanged in some applications. Three common viscosity cups used include the Zahn, Ford, and Din cup. -Strainers – strainers should be lint-free, as well as tested for resistance to solvents and water. Soak the strainer for a couple minutes in water and also in solvent. Debris could end up in the paint cut if there is any change to the strainer. Strainers also should have nylon mesh instead of cotton. This is because cotton has lint that can be deposited into the paint cup. -Primer Color Choice – most paint manufacturers offer a tintable option for primer. Tintable primer can be used before applying the color coat to promote color holdout and allow for easier hiding when applying the color coat. This may also speed up the refinish process because a faster application of the color coat can be achieved because less coatings may need to be applied. -Primer Guns – there are currently two types of spray guns used in primer application. High Volume Low Pressure (HVLP), spray guns are one of the more commonly used types of primer guns. This gun uses a high amount of air volume and converts it to low pressure. This helps ensure that more paint is applied to the intended surface, and reduces the chance of overspray. The second type is the reduced pressure (RP) spray gun. This gun applies primer at pressures the same or lower than HVLP guns. -Triggering On and Off – triggering the spray gun on and off at the beginning and end of a spray stroke allows for less use of refinish materials, especially at the edge of panels. -Proper Spray Gun Use – to properly use a spray gun, hold the spray gun the proper distance from the panel. Keep the spray gun level and perpendicular to the panel surface at all times, following the angles and curves with a wrist motion. Move the spray gun in a steady, even motion before pulling the trigger. This should occur before reaching the edge of the refinish area. Finally, release the trigger before stopping movement of the spray gun. -Heeling and Arching – heeling is allowing the spray gun to tilt. Arching or fanning is failure to keep the spray gun parallel to the surface. Both heeling and arching can result in uneven film thickness, orange peel, dry spray, and excessive overspray Heeling on the left. Arching on the right -Travel Speed – the travel speed is the rate that the spray gun is moved along the panel surface. The travel speed of a spray gun can affect finish appearance, and therefore should be steady and even. If the travel speed is too slow, the material may sag and run. This type of finish is unacceptable, and will need to be sanded down and possibly reapplied. If the travel speed is too fast, the material lays down with a rough texture. This type of finish is also unacceptable. -Spray Gun Distance to Panel (setback) – the distance that a spray gun is help relative to the panel surface (also called setback) can have effects similar to that of travel speed. A spray gun that is too close will deposit too much refinish material on the panel, potentially causing runs and sags. These defects will need to be removed. A spray distance that is too far back can have a dry, rough, or poor coverage effect. This can also lead to excessive overspray, causing wasted material and time Top left – 3” – 4” setback. Too close. Top right – 12”-16” setback. Too far. Bottom – 6”-10” setback. Proper distance. -Reverse Priming – reverse priming is the process of applying a larger coat of primer first, followed by progressively smaller applications. Reverse priming is used to ensure a smoother surface, allow for easier sanding, and reduce the amount of overspray edges when spot priming. There are multiple advantages of reverse priming, which include -Less overspray on the edges of each coat (less texture and better adhesion) -Less potential for trapped solvent to cause die back or solvent popping -Edges being left open, allowing solvent to escape, which decreases the dry time -An edge that is easier to feather into the surrounding existing finish Traditional Priming Method on the top. Reverse Priming Method on the bottom. The first coat is the coat closer to the black line. Then second coat, then third coat -Spraying Difficult Areas – difficult areas to spray may include corners and edges of panels. When spraying difficult areas -It may be best to spray these areas first -The pattern size and air pressure may need to be reduced -It may be best to hold the spray gun closer than normal, for example, 1-2 inches (25-50 mm) away from the panel -It may help to aim directly at the center of the problem area -Spray Gun Settings – when adjusting a spray gun, the refinish technician needs to be aware of what adjustments are needed -Fan Width – fan width can be adjusted from a small diameter circle to a large oblong pattern. The fan width adjustment knob is generally on top of the spray gun body. Turn the control knob all the way in to create a small, round pattern with dense coverage. Turn the control knob gradually out to form a vertical, elongated pattern with lighter coverage. If turned too far, the pattern will be too heavy on the ends and too light in the middle -Primer Deposit – the amount of primer deposited can be adjusted to a lighter deposition by turning the fluid control adjustment in, and a heavier deposition by backing the adjustment out. The fluid control adjustment knob is generally located below the fan width adjustment knob on the spray gun body -Air Pressure – air pressure at the gun inlet is often provided by the spray gun maker. The proper inlet air pressure will give a reduced pressure at the air cap with the fan control wide open -Spray Gun Distance and Overlap – spray gun distance when spraying waterborne refinish materials is about the same as spraying solvent-borne refinish materials, 6-8 inches (150-200mm). This may be true for most products, but not for all. Requirements may differ by paint maker. Just like with solvent-borne refinishing materials, most paint makers recommend using a 75%-80% overlap. -Applying Sealer – there are several items that should be taken into consideration in regard to the application of sealer. For example, sealer can be the start of a contour mapping defect if it is not applied correctly. -Wet-On-Wet Application – sealers are typically applied wet-on-wet. Wet-on-wet means the next coating is applied after a flash period and not after the previous coat has fully cured. Most sealers have a window for recoating. If the sealer is not recoated within the window, it may need to be sanded or resealed before applying color. Recoat windows can vary between products. -Using a Slow Reducer – sealer application must be as smooth as possible, or it will show through. Using a slower reducer in the sealer than may be used for other coatings may help the sealer level out -Spray Gun Technique – be sure to use the same gun technique and the same high-quality spray gun as is used when applying basecoat and clearcoat. This is done so the application looks the same and has the same quality. Sometimes there are lesser quality spray guns used when applying undercoats. This should not be done when applying sealer -Minor Defects – minor defects, such as small runs, sags, or debris, may be sanded out. The amount of sanding needed will dictate whether recoating with sealer will be necessary Priming and Blocking Repaired Areas (3/3) Block Sanding -Block Sanding – block sanding is an important step between the last coat of primer and the first coat of sealer or basecoat. Without proper blocking, many imperfections will show up in the final paint applications. The term ‘block sanding’ came from the original way this step was performed, with a piece of sandpaper wrapped around a block of wood. This allowed for a uniform smooth surface. Now there are blocks of all different shapes, sizes, and materials to conform to the varied contours of a vehicle surface. Block sanding is required to identify defects, such as sandscratches and high or low spots in the substrate, so they can be repaired prior to applying basecoat and clearcoat materials. -Sanding Blocks – hand sanding blocks are used by applying even, moderate pressure along the length of the block using the palm and extended fingers. The palm must be flat against a flexible block to avoid applying uneven pressure in the spaces between fingers. Sanding blocks are available in various sizes, shapes, and materials, and may be made of rubber, foam, wood, or fiberglass, and vary in flexibility and function. Sheets of sandpaper may also be folded around the sanding block. -Guide Coat – the guide coat is a contrasting color to the undercoat that identifies high and low spots. When sanded, it is removed from the high spots and remains in the low spots and imperfections. The guide coat may be sprayed on as a thin mist product or a fine powder. A guide coat that is a powder is typically available in a plastic container and applied using a sponge. -Block Sanding Techniques – when block sanding, move from side-to-side, up-and-down, and at angles. A sanding block may be used similar to a body file or cheese grater by holding it parallel to the contour of the panel and moving at a 30 degree angle. Be sure to sand a little and then check the contour of the surface, and remember that refinishing will highlight imperfections, not hide them. Block sanding may either be done with a pneumatic sander or by hand, using a foam or rubber block Preparing a Vehicle for Refinishing (1/3) Removing Pinstripes and Decal Adhesive -Refinishing Safety Considerations – it is important to be aware of all safety considerations when working with solvents and refinish materials, including waterborne products, as they may still include solvents and other hazardous materials. National/local regulations will require employers to provide the proper personal protective equipment (PPE) to protect workers from potential hazards. Recommended PPE for refinish technicians will include the following -Respiratory protection. Fresh air supplied respirators provide the best protection and may be mandated in some states when applying refinish materials -Eye Protection -Chemical-resistant gloves, such as nitrile gloves -A full-body paint suit -*Safety Data Sheets (SDS) are a good source for determining PPE requirement -Taped Pinstripe Removal – there are a few different methods that can be used for removal of tape pinstripes -Heat Gun – one method for removing taped pinstriping is to apply heat with a heat gun or heat lamp to loosen the adhesive. Heat may be required to bring the surface to a recommended temperature or to loosen the adhesive. When using a heat gun, use a circular motion and pull the taped pinstriping away from the panel, while applying tension near the panel -Chemical Remover – another method for removing stripe tape is using a chemical remover, such as a general-purpose adhesive remover or similar material. Test the chemical remover on a small, hidden area, or on damaged panels that been removed, before applying chemical removers to an undamaged panel or visible area -Eraser Disc – an eraser disc can be used to remove the pinstripe and the adhesive residue. Use similar techniques with the eraser disc to remove pinstripes as when removing emblem adhesive. This should be done by applying light pressure, and using horizontal and vertical movements. Residue should be removed from the eraser disc by lightly rubbing the area with general-purpose adhesive remover or isopropyl alcohol. Do not use chemical removers and a heat gun or heat lamp simultaneously -Painted Pinstripe Removal – painted pinstripes can be OEM or aftermarket applications. In areas requiring refinishing, to remove painted pinstripes, use a power sander. Feather out the area to create a smooth area, while keeping the repair area as small as possible. If areas are not feathered out properly, the edges of the pinstripe will show through -Emblems – removing emblems and nameplates from a vehicle can be slightly more complicated than removing pinstripes and decals, particularly if you intend to reuse them. The most common method of removal is to apply heat using a heat gun, induction heater, or heat lamp, followed by a plastic removal tool. Another common method for removal is using plastic fishing line to cut through the adhesive to remove the emblem -Decal and Wrap Removal – some vehicles may also have factory-installed decals, aftermarket vinyl decals, or vehicle wraps that will need to be removed as part of the refinish prep process. -Heat Application – decals can be removed similar to the way taped pinstriping is removed. Such as applying heat with a heat gun or a heat lamp to loosen the adhesive. Be careful not to overheat the area -Eraser Discs and Chemical Remover – decals may also be removed by cleaning with an eraser disc or using a chemical remover, such as general-purpose adhesive remover. Test the chemical remover on a small, hidden area, or on a damaged panel, before applying chemical removers to an undamaged panel or visible area -Wraps – a vehicle wrap is typically used for advertising on company vehicles to cover a large area, or the entire exterior of a vehicle, and are typically removed using a heat gun or heat lamp, similar to removing tape pinstripes or decals. After repairing the vehicle, wraps are typically replaced at the facility where they were originally installed Emblem Adhesive Removal -Emblem Adhesive Removal – the common methods used to remove emblem adhesive are similar to those used for tape stripes and decals. * When applying a general-purpose adhesive remover, wear safety glasses, rubber gloves, and the proper respirator. Apply in a well-ventilated area -Removing Residue – general-purpose adhesive remover is used to loosen and remove adhesive. When using an adhesive remover the surface must be cool, soaking time may be required, and an aerosol can or pump spray bottle should be used on vertical panels. You should scrape the area with a plastic razor blade or squeegee to remove the adhesive residue; additional applications may be needed to remove all of the adhesive residue and you should clean the area with soap and water immediately after adhesive removal. * Take caution when using adhesive removers on or near vinyl or rubber trim pieces and emblem/faceplates with anodized coatings as it can damage the textured finish -Eraser Disc – an eraser disc can be used to remove the adhesive that is left behind after emblem removal. When used correctly, an eraser disc will not damage the painted surface. When using an eraser disc, you should follow the product maker’s speed recommendation. You should use horizontal and vertical movements and apply light pressure. Heavy pressure will not assist in the removal efficiency. Work against the rotation of the eraser disc. Residue from the eraser disc can be removed by lightly rubbing the area with general-purpose adhesive remover or isopropyl alcohol, if needed. If a film remains, rework the area with the eraser disc after it has dried. * Eraser discs should not be used on lacquer coatings or thermoplastic polymers like polyolefin bumper covers -Applying Heat – heat can be applied with a heat gun or heat lamp to soften the adhesive. There are specific safety precautions and additional removal tools are utilized when using a heat gun or heat lamp. Do not overheat the panels as this will damage the paint film. You should monitor heat settings, staying a safe distance from the panel, and using a circular motion during application. You should also wear gloves to avoid contact with the heater. Use a plastic razor blade or squeegee to remove the warmed adhesive, and apply adhesive remover to remove excess adhesive, after the panel has cooled. * Do not use chemical removers and a heat gun or heat lamp simultaneously Cleaning the Affected Area Surface Contaminants – when preparing a vehicle for refinish, the first step should always be cleaning of the affected area. This step is critical to ensure all surface contaminants are removed to keep them from being spready around the refinish area and clogging up your sandpaper. Even clean hands can leave behind oil and salt contaminants. The oil can cause adhesion issues or fisheyes. The salt is a desiccant that attacks moisture, which can lead to blistering. Nitrile gloves can be worn during repair procedures to prevent incidental contact. If contact cannot be avoided, clean the area as soon as possible so it is not forgotten. -Water-Soluble – water-soluble contaminants typically include salt, sugar, dirt, and bugs. To remove water-soluble contaminants, an initial cleaning with a neutral pH soap and water should be done when the vehicle enters the repair facility before any repairs are started. Using hot water decreases the surface tension of the water, which helps the water reach into the pores and crevices. Avoid car wash products that contain wax, to minimize the chance of fisheyes -Non Water-Soluble – non water-soluble contaminants include oil, wax, grease, silicone, petroleum products, and handprints. This can cause coatings to flow around the contaminated area and result in fisheyes, which can cause adhesion issues. Adhesion is adversely affected on both the top and bottom sides of the contaminated area -Cleaning with Solvents- solvent cleaners may be alcohol or petroleum based, and are provided in various strengths. Generally, petroleum-based cleaners cannot be used on plastic parts. Refer to the technical data sheet (TDS) to determine whether or not the cleaners is appropriate for the substrate to be cleaned. Solvent cleaners may have antistatic properties. Wiping panels when cleaning can build up static electricity on the vehicle, which attracts dust and dirt particles. Masking the vehicle with plastic can also cause static electricity. Cleaners with antistatic properties should be used after other cleaning products are used. This is done as a final step to remove any static electricity that has built up during the cleaning process. Do not substitute solvent cleaners with lacquer thinners or reducers. Lacquer thinners or reducers may evaporate too quickly, and will not allow the dirt to be lifted and wiped away. They may also be composed of stronger-solvents, which can cause coatings to reflow or cause other types of adverse reactions. * Nitrile gloves and a respirator should be worn when working with solvents -Substrate Identification – it is crucial to identify the substrate before using any surface cleaner to ensure the appropriate cleaner is used. A substrate, in terms of refinishing, is anything that offers a sound foundation for topcoat application. Substrates may be materials other than just topcoats. The base material can be considered a substrate. Examples of some substrates include -The original finish -E-coat -Areas that have been previously refinished or featheredged -Flexible, rigid, fiber-reinforced, or non fiber-reinforced plastic parts -Aluminum, steel, or galvanized metals -Body filler Surface Cleaners and Tack Cloths -Waterborne Surface Cleaners – when working with waterborne refinishing materials, surface cleaners must also be used to clean contaminants from the panel surface. These cleaners are used on freshly prepared surfaces before the basecoat is applied. They are also typically water-based and must be totally removed before application of the basecoat. Failure to do so may cause finish defects. Additionally, the cleaner should not be allowed to dry before being wiped off the panel. If this occurs, more cleaner should be applied and wiped from the panel surface. Be sure to follow the directions as stated on the TDS -Fisheyes and Adhesion Failure – failure to properly clean the surface before starting the refinish preparation process, as required before each stage of the refinish process, can lead to costly refinishing defects and cycle time delays. One example of such a defect is fisheyes. Fisheyes are small, crater-like openings that appear in refinish material when it is wet. Fisheyes may be caused by silicone, oil, or grease contaminants. For example, oil or grease contaminants may be introduced to the finish by the technician, such as grease reside from lunch or oily skin. Adhesion failure is another example and can be identified by paint film peeling, delaminating, or chipping away. Adhesin failure may be caused by failing to remove contaminants on the surface, such as oil, sanding residue, overspray, water, or solvent cleaner -Proper Cleaning Method – when cleaning the surface to prepare for application of refinish coatings, make sure to use lint-free towels, wipe the surface while it is still wet. Cleaners are designed to lift contaminants off the surface so that they can be wiped off. The contaminant will rest back on the surface if the cleaner is allowed to dry. Wipe in one direction and use the two-towel method. Use on towel for wetting the surface and a separate towel for wiping the surface until it is dry. Ensure that the surface is wiped dry. * Waterborne basecoats are more sensitive to wax and grease remover, so it is vital that it is entirely removed from the surface when using a waterborne paint system -Tack Cloths – tack cloths are designed to remove dust and lint from the vehicle surface before applying refinish coats and tack the surface between color coats. The tack cloth should be unfolded and bunched into a ball before using. Do not apply pressure to the panel when using a tack cloth. Using a tack cloth when it is flat or folded can damage freshly coated surfaces. Tack cloths can be lightly dragged across the surface to help identify dry spray. Because waterborne basecoats are more sensitive to contamination, tack cloths designed for use with waterborne products do not contain varnish. This type of tack cloth is safe for use with solvent-based products as well. * The type of tack cloth shown here does not contain varnish because waterborne basecoats are more sensitive to contamination Sanding and Scuffing The Purpose of Sanding – there are a few reasons for sanding surfaces to be refinished, prior to application of any refinishing products. One reason is to increase the surface area for better adhesion of refinish coatings. Increasing the surface area improves the mechanical bond of refinish coatings. Another reason is to allow solvents to absorb into the surface, which improves the chemical bond. Leveling minor imperfections in the surface is another reason for sanding prior to applying refinishing products Sanded Surface = more surface area Red line is smooth surface Blue wave line is sanded surface Blue line is sanded surface straightened -Sandpaper – there are many levels or grits of sandpaper available, which range from coarse to very fine, and sanding may be done wet or dry. Wet sanding requires sandpaper that is designed for wet sanding, and the surface should be kept constantly wet while sanding. Some product makers require soaking the sandpaper before use. -Sanding Best Practices – when preparing a surface for sanding, there are some best practices that should be followed. Always refer to technical data sheets (TDS) for the proper sandpaper grit selection. Sandpaper grit selection may vary, depending on the sanding method being applied. Generally, you should only increase grit in increments of 100, up to 500 grit. You should increase increments by 100, for sanding materials above 500 grit, and increments of 500 for sanding materials above 1,000 grit -Sanding Issue – poor sanding techniques can lead to refinish defects, such as scratch marks that happen as a result of using a final sanding grit that is too coarse. Not removing sanding dust and residue, or sanding before the coating is completely cured, can cause problems as well. * Dried waterborne basecoats are thinner, so proper surface preparation is even more important -Coarse Scratches and Excessive Primer-Surfacer – finish sanding with a grade of sandpaper that is more coarse than what is recommended by your refinish product maker, and applying excessive coats of primer surfaced to fill these scratches, can result in refinish defects. White = clearcoat Red = basecoat Dark gray = primer/surfacer Tan = body filler Light gray = substrate/panel surface -Temperature Changes – coarse sandscratches in the metal that expand and contract with temperature changes can result in visible scratch marks. This is more likely to occur where refinish materials are thinnest -Body Filler – body filler that is sanded too coarsely can also cause visible scratches. Coarse grit sandpaper is more prone to “plow” through the body filler rather than cutting it. These parts of the body filler may crumble over time and fall into crevices that the primer bridged over. -Shrinking Primer – primer shrinks as it cures and the more primer that is applied, the more it will shrink. This shrinkage can result in visible sandscratches below the surface of the finish. * Excessive coats of primer-surfacer should never be applied to fill coarse scratches in any substrate -Swelling – solvents can soak into body filler. This can cause the sandscratches to swell and appear on the surface. A 2K primer-surfacer or sealer will create a barrier against strong solvents from the clearcoat, but solvents from excessive primer coats can soak into the body filler and cause swelling -Scuffing – scuffing is the form of surface preparation that is least aggressive and used to degloss the surface on a panel being refinished, or to aid in adhesion for new parts that require light abrasion before finishing. Scuffing may be done using a scuff pad, wet or dry sanding with fine grit sandpaper, or a paste-type sanding material using moderate pressure without creating scratches or breaking into the undercoat. Scuffing is sometimes done after application of primer or sealer to remove dirt nibs or small contaminants. Scuffing pads are made of a nylon-type material or a woven plastic abrasive, and are typically color-coded or labeled as coarse to ultra-fine. They may used to prepare areas for blending and are used in areas that a power sander cannot adequately access. Scuffing pads may also be used as a final sand if areas are identified in the prepared surfaces that were missed Preparing a Vehicle for Refinishing (2/3) OEM Finish Preparation -Vehicle Maker Finish and Repaired Panel Preparation – when refinishing a repaired area, the surrounding vehicle maker finish may only need to be cleaned and scuffed or sanded. A vehicle maker finish often provides a sound substrate foundation and generally does not need to be partially or completely removed in preparation for a refinish. Some vehicle maker finishes might have problems that originate from the factory, such as excessive or inadequate film build areas or lack of adhesion. When working on a vehicle maker finish, proper steps need to be taken to ensure a proper repair -Film Thickness Gauge – film thickness gauges are used to measure refinish material film thickness. Depending on the type of film thickness gauge, it may be able to measure film thicknesses on a variety of surfaces. This is because the gauge may be designed to operate on any metal or just steel (ferrous). Depending on the gauge, it may be electronic or magnetic. Film thickness gauges measure film thickness in mils or microns. One mil is 0.025 mm or 1/1,000 of an inch. One micron is 1/1,000 of one milimeter -Original Finish/Refinish – when determining if the finish is original or not, identify how much of the total finish is basecoat/clearcoat. This will help determine if there is body filler used or if the surface was previously refinished. There may instances when the vehicle has never been in a collision, but the film thickness shows that the panel has been refinished. This happens due to damage that occurred at the factory. Even though the vehicle is refinished, it still may be considered an OEM finish. Paint makers may require stripping areas that have unidentifiable refinish materials. Removing surfaces with unidentifiable materials can aid in starting with a good foundation on which topcoats can be applied. Signs that a vehicle has been refinished include overspray, different colors on inner panel areas, a poor color match, tape lines, and a different surface texture. -Maximum Film Thickness – paint makers have limits on the maximum amount of refinish material that should be applied. This thickness represents the total amount of material on the surface after all coatings have been applied. If a vehicle or panel requires being refinished, the technician needs to identify the total build on the surface of the part. Vehicle maker paint film thickness is generally between 4 to 6 mils. If film thickness is 11 mils and an additional 5 mils are required to achieve the proper refinishing, the originally 11 mils of surface thickness needs to be reduced to about 5 or 6 mils before refinishing can begin -Identifying Fillers – fillers can be identified in the refinishing area using a film thickness gauge. If it is determined that the refinish must be removed over the area of filler, special care must be taken to not gouge the surface of the filler -E-Coat Considerations – some parts are shipped with E-coat already applied. Perform a solvent test on parts shipped with an E-coat to verify that the E-coat is sound and not just a shipping coating. Solvent testing will also identify whether or not a substrate will hold up to reducing agents that will be applied to the refinish area -Preparing an E-Coated Surface – you must use soap and water to prepare a topcoat application that has an E-coated surface. You should also clean the area using a wax and grease remover, and by scuffing the surface of the E-coat to aid in adhesion of the topcoats. Blow and tack the surface with clean compressed air and a tack cloth, then apply sealer. Some refinish systems allow a sealer to be applied directly to the E-coat without scuffing or sanding. This will allow for the scuffing and priming step to be skipped -Featheredge Process- to create a featheredge, sand until about 6 to 10 mm of each layer of coating is removed and can be seen. This will level out any harsh lines around the repair area including minor scratches and nicks. The featheredge should look like a bird’s feather, with soft, smooth edges. -Body Filler – begin sanding over the repaired area and work outward. When you should featheredge during the repair process is a matter of personal preference. You should sand the body filler with P180 grit as a starting point. The surface needs to be leveled with a primer-surfacer and then block-sanded smooth. Areas that will not be covered with primer-surfacer should only be scuffed or sanded using P500 grit and sanding material -Sanding Process – use a power sander with a flexible backing pad, place the sander flat against the surface and taper the paint layers by moving the sander in a cross-cutting pattern. Stop frequently to feel for rough edges -Identifying Uncured Finishes – the need to identify uncured finishes is important. An uncured finish will be weak and not resilient to abuse. An uncured finish may also feel soft and pliable, almost rubbery. The finish may chip or scratch easily. * A featheredge over an uncured finish may result in lifting during the sanding process or lifting during the refinish application New Part Preparation -Bare Steel Preparation – when working with bare steel parts, the refinish technician must determine whether or not a part is galvanized, and if a metal cleaner or conversion coating, or a self-etching primer, is required. -Refinishing Products – refinishing products that can be applied to bare metal substrates include -Metal preparation/conversion coatings. These coatings may be used before epoxy primer, but are generally not used with self-etching primer or over body filler -Zinc chromate/phosphate primers, which cover the substrate, but do not etch into the surface -Direct-to-metal or etching primers -Epoxy primers, urethane -2K primers that are easy to sand, provide high build, and have minimal shrinkage. A sealer may not be required -* Waterborne primers should not be applied to bare metal substrates -Prep for Refinishing – preparing a steel part for refinish will typically include cleaning the part and adjacent areas using wax and grease remover. It will also include scuffing or sanding the part with the recommended grit when required for proper adhesion. Be sure not to perforate any galvanized coatings. Some cleaners have an abrasive in them that aids in surface preparation. Clean the part again using wax and grease remover, then apply a corrosion-resistant primer. If using an epoxy primer, a metal conditioner and conversion coating may be required -Aluminum Preparation – the preparation steps for a bare or repaired aluminum part are similar to bare and repaired steel. * Do not use refinish tools and sanding materials on steel and then on aluminum. Cross contamination from steel particles can result in galvanic corrosion in aluminum, which will also cause premature metal damage and paint failure -Working with Aluminum – when working with aluminum, do not use grits coarser than 80. Aluminum scratches very easily and can be difficult to mask due to the softness of aluminum. Clean bare metal surfaces with soap and water. This will remove any water-soluble contaminants. Follow this with the use of wax and grease remover. These two steps will ensure a clean part with no contaminants. Apply a metal cleaner and conversion coating made specifically for aluminum, if required -Preparing Aluminum for Refinishing – when preparing aluminum parts for refinishing, remove the oxide by sanding or abrading the surface. Uncoated aluminum needs to be recleaned. The rate at which aluminum oxidizes varies depending on temperature and humidity levels. After being left uncoated for an extended period of time, the aluminum creates an aluminum oxide coating that needs to be removed. * The oxide layer will begin to reform almost instantly after the part is sanded -Preparation Considerations – refinishing preparation considerations include: Specific expelling or etching primers that may be required by the vehicle maker or refinish product maker. Aluminum panels must be kept free from contact with steel particles when the aluminum is bare. Steel particles that embed into the panel will react with the aluminum and cause surface imperfections Preparing a Vehicle for Refinishing ( 3 /3) Plastics Preparation -Plastic and Composite Refinishing Preparation – when refinishing plastic parts, considerations include -Identifying the type of plastic material use. Categories include rigid vs flexible -Paint maker recommendations for plastic cleaners or other preparation steps -Determining if an adhesion promoter must be applied to the surface before coating applique. Adhesion promoters are typically required on polyolefin plastics -Materials for Plastics – special materials for refinishing plastics may include -Special sealer designed for plastic that may also serve as an adhesion promoter -Adhesion promoters, which are continually being updated -Flex additive, which gives some clearcoats more elasticity. Some clearcoats are quite rigid and would crack if flex additive was not used in the mix -* Some clearcoats should not be applied to plastics -Orientation and Static Electricity – depending upon the application, refinishing a part off of the vehicle may require it to be positioned in the same orientation as it will be on the vehicle. For example, when refinishing a bumper cover that is off of the vehicle, placing the bumper in a horizontal position, as it will be on the vehicle, will aid with color match where the bumper meets the quarter panel. It can also be helpful to ground the vehicle and part being refinished off of the vehicle. Additional antistatic options may include antistatic spray, which is a spray mixture of deionized water and alcohol used in place of wax and grease remover, or an antistatic gun, which blows deionized air on the surface, preventing static buildup -Surface Considerations for Plastics – before starting the refinishing process on a plastic part, there are certain things to consider -Primer – whether or not a part has vehicle maker primer applied to it is one thing you should consider. A primed plastic part will typically not require an adhesion promoter. Check the part by performing a solvent test. You should then wipe a hidden area with reducer. Do not do this on the backside of the part, as the backside is often bare plastic. If color shows up on the cloth, it is likely coming from a shipping coating or inferior primer that must be removed completely before refinishing -Ready for Primer – when the part is ready for primer, it is a good idea to remove the fuzzy plastic residue created by sanding. One way to do this is to block sand the fuzzy plastic with 320 grit. Next, blow off or wipe the area with a dry rag. Vacuum the area and check it again for any pinholes or deep scratches that need to be filled. -Type of Plastic – the type of plastic the part is made of, if not primed, should be considered. Certain types of non-primed plastic may require a specific adhesion promoter. One source for identifying the type of plastic you are working with is the ISO code typically found on the backside of bumper covers -Texture – whether the part is textured or smooth is another consideration. This may affect how the part is prepared for refinishing. The number of coats of material applied may affect the appearance. Applying too many coats of material to a textured part may cause it to appear smoother than it should -Paint Cracking – another consideration is if there is any paint cracking (spider-webbing). This requires the finish to be sanded with a power sander until all the cracking is removed. If this is not done, the cracking will show up again after refinishing -Rigid Plastics – rigid plastic parts may include -Sheet-molded compounds (SMC) -Fiberglass -Polycarbonates -* Before refinishing plastic, the refinish technician should determine if the refinish material will require the use of a flex additive, and understand that the part may contain fibers that can wick cleaners and solvent into the surface and not be released -Flexible Plastics – flexible plastic parts may include -Polyamide -Polyurethane -Thermo-polyurethane -* Some common parts include bumper covers and body trim. Before any work or refinishing of these products can begin, determine if the refinish material will require flex additive, and the specific preparation steps. An interior part may get prepped differently from an exterior part -Cleaning Plastic Parts – there are certain considerations to observe when cleaning plastic parts. -Mold Release Agent – mold release agents must be removed from unprimed, or bare, plastic parts. This mold release agent can cause adhesion issues or peeling if the part is not thoroughly cleaned. Most paint makers only require cleaning and scuffing to remove the mold release agents. The recommendation for pre-baking unprimed bumper covers to remove the mold release agents is typically not required. This is because most replacement bumper cover makers now use water-based mold release agents during the manufacturing process. Always follow the surface preparation instructions for the paint system and the substrate being refinished to ensure the paint maker warranty is maintained -Soap and Water – use soap and water, followed by a plastic cleaner -Solvents – only use solvents designed for bare plastic, as these are less likely to be absorbed into the plastic, causing it to swell. It is also important to wipe the plastic dry immediately after application -Primer and Antistatic Cleaner – it may be a good idea to test the cleaning product on the backside of the part or an unseen area to make sure it will not remove the primer. The final step is to wipe the entire panel with an antistatic cleaner. Some paint makers provide a specified product for plastic parts that is both a plastic cleaner and antistatic cleaner -Advanced Driver Assist Systems (ADAS) – if the vehicle is equipped with an advanced driver assist system, such as adaptive cruise control or parallel park assist, the OEM may not allow repairs to or in front of the sensors, as it may impede the sensor’s ability to function. Typically, the only repair that can be done is refinishing, and that can only be done once because excessive film thickness can affect the sensors. * Review manufacturer service information to confirm their position on repairing or refinishing bumper covers on vehicles equipped with any of these systems Processing Vehicle Salvage Determine Salvage Value -It’s Still Worth Something – while it may not be cost-effective to repair a vehicle that has been in a collision, it still retains some salvage value. -Valuation – when a vehicle is damaged beyond repair, auto insurance companies will declare that vehicle is a total loss. Each insurance company has its own standard operating procedure (SOP) to determine the salvage value of a vehicle. Insurance companies will determine a vehicle’s salvage value through a variety of methods, such as: -Salvage bids from local salvage buyers -Online tools that provide an estimated salvage value -Salvage auctions -Obtaining Salvage Quotes – in many cases salvage value is determined by contacting local salvage buyers to obtain quotes or bids. Sending photographs of the salvage vehicle with details about the specific damage to that vehicle is often required. This will provide the potential buyer the information necessary to make an educated decision on their quote or bid. In cases where a salvage vehicle has a higher value, or for specialty vehicles, the salvage buyer may choose to physically inspect the vehicle prior to providing a quote or bid. -Software and Third Party Databases – online vendors are another resource available to help determine salvage value. These vendors use historical salvage sales information to provide an estimated value of the salvage. When using this type of tool, it will most likely be necessary to provide additional information about the vehicle including the: -Year, make, and model information -Vehicle mileage -Vehicle option information, such as engine and trim packages -Location of the vehicle damage -Total value of estimated damages -Salvage Auctions – in many cases, insurance companies will choose to utilize a salvage auction to sell all of their salvage. When it occurs, the vehicle is auctioned off to the highest bidder, establishing the salvage value Complete Salvage Process -Salvage Value Determining Factors – there are some additional factors that can have a significant impact on salvage values -Overall Vehicle Condition – it is important to closely inspect vehicles that are considered a total loss to determine the overall vehicle condition. Pre-existing damage to the vehicle’s body panels and/or the interior, as well as any obvious mechanical damage can have a significant impact on salvage value -Factory Options and Aftermarket Add-Ons – in addition, it is important to pay close attention to identify any aftermarket equipment installed on the vehicle. For example, aftermarket wheels, running boards, drivelines upgrades, or additional factory options, such as entertainment systems and towing packages, can have a significant impact on salvage value. Note: Some insurance companies may utilize a salvage vehicle check-list to help highlight factory options, aftermarket equipment, and areas of the vehicle that are undamaged to help ensure the best possible returns on salvage Determining the Disposition of Salvage -Determine Disposition of Salvage – when a vehicle is considered a total loss, the vehicle owner, depending on prevailing laws, may have more than one option to consider. -Insurance Company Retains Salvage – the first option is to collect a settlement check from the insurance company in exchange for the salvage vehicle. This settlement would reflect the value of the vehicle less any applicable fees, such as a deductible or prior unrelated damage. When exercising this option, the title of the vehicle is transferred to the insurance company so the vehicle can be sold for salvage. -Owner Retains Salvage – the second option is for the owner to retain their vehicle and collect a settlement check from their insurance company for the established market value. This settlement would reflect the value of the vehicle less any applicate fees, such as a deductible, prior unrelated damage, and the established salvage value. When choosing this option, the owner is essentially buying the vehicle back from the insurance company. -State Laws and Guidelines – a state’s laws may not allow a vehicle owner to retain the salvage vehicle, or they may establish buy-back age requirements and/or other specifics about the vehicle’s drivability. If the state does allow the driver to repurchase the vehicle, it may require the insurance company to have the vehicle retitled as a salvage or rebuilt vehicle. Each state has different laws pertaining to a vehicle owner’s repurchasing a vehicle as salvage. The owner will need to consult with their financial advisor or attorney about the specific laws in their state. Recycled Parts Considerations (1/2) Recycled Parts Overview -Recycling Industry – to keep up with the increasing demands placed on collision repair facilities, most recyclers have increased their professional standards to ensure better customer service and provide high quality parts to the collision industry. Many recyclers also have an updated inventory process that allows customers to search online inventories and have improved parts descriptions to ensure repairers understand the part condition before it arrives at the repair facility -Benefits of Using Recycled Parts – there are benefits to using recycled parts. One of these benefits is reducing cycle time. For example, if a new door shell is ordered, all parts must be transferred to the new part. However, if a recycled part is ordered, it may already contain the necessary parts. Another main benefit of using recycled parts is that they are still factory parts, which means the part has the: -Original factory corrosion protection -Proper fit -Proper mounting locations -Note: Note that were may be a liability concerns attached to using recycled safety items such as supplemental restraint system (SRS) parts or brake system parts -Industry Positions on Recycled parts – though the use of recycled parts is quite common in collision repair, there are differing opinions about said usage in the industry. Vehicle makers generally do not recommend the use of recycled parts. One of the primary reasons given is that there is a lack of systems in place to provide quality control. To help put customers at ease, many insurers offer a warranty on sheet metal parts that is good for as long as the customer owns the vehicle. -Industry Positions on Use of OEM Non-Deployed Airbags – there are additional industry positions on recycled parts, specifically on the use of recycled OEM non-deployed airbags. No vehicle maker recommendations their use, not even vehicle makers that typically acknowledge the use of recycled parts. Insurance companies in the United States will not include a recycled airbag on their estimate. Some industry associations, for example the Automotive Service Association (ASA), discourage the use of these types of recycled airbags. The Society for Collision Repair Specialists (SCRS) recommends that repairers use exceptional caution when performing repairs and to only use OEM parts that they know will perform with the same level of quantity as the original part, both upon installation, and for the life of the vehicle. Note: Always follow vehicle maker recommended repair procedures when replacing SRS components -Automotive Recyclers Association (ARA) – the ARA is an international trade association. The ARA has developed several programs, including the Certified Automotive Recycle (CAR) program and the Gold Seal program. The CAR program creates a set of professional standards for participating recycling organizations. The Gold Seal program focuses on customer service concerns, as well as maintaining reputable, quality business practices throughout the automotive recycling industry -Warranties from Recycling Facilities – warranties vary according to each recycling facility. Those that participate in the ARA Gold Seal program are required to offer written guarantees on their parts. The ARA also recommends body parts be warrantied for fit and corrosion protection for at least one rear. Additionally, some recyclers: -May provide a limited lifetime warranty on sheet metal parts -Warranty mechanical parts of sheet metal assemblies such as door parts -May warranty other mechanical parts for 30-90 days -Note: Warranties typically include language about the recycler not being responsible for improper installation, accidental damage, or misuse Making Informed Business Decisions -Terms Used for Recycled Parts – when working with recycled parts and the recycling industry, there are common industry terms used to describe these parts, including: -Used -Like, kind, and quality (LKQ) -Salvage -Note: On the damage report, or repair estimate, it is important to note that remanufactured, rebuilt, or reconditioned parts are not listed as recycled parts -Recycled Part Usage Considerations – there are several important items to consider when making a determination to use recycled parts. For instance, proper documentation of parts is required by the repair facility. Paperwork should include copies of part invoices, as well as the vehicle identification number (VIN) of the source vehicle for each part, in addition to the make, model, and year -Warranties – the use of recycled parts should not void any warranties that would have been maintained had a new part been used. In this instance, warranties from the recycler and insurer may take the place of vehicle maker warranties -Part Condition and Durability – consider the condition of the part when it arrives. It is important to make sure the part has not been comprised by corrosion, or by steps in the removal process, that may have altered the strength of the metal, such as thinning, heating, or bending. This is because the part must be durable in the event of another collision. A part that requires extensive repair that was not previously disclosed may not be worth investing the time in compared to buying the part new -Part Availability – be sure to consider the practically of finding a recycled part, as well as the length of time it will take to be shipped to the collision repair facility. Finding a rare part may take more resources and time than available. If so, it may be necessary to explore alternative options, such as using new or aftermarket parts -OEM Recycled Parts Identification – to help ensure part fit and durability, it is important that the recycled part be a factory original (OEM) part. Check the part for consistent paint film thickness and appearance, as there should be uniform color consistency across the panel. If not, it is likely that the panel has been repaired, replaced, and/or refinished. In addition, check for the absence of VIN labels, or the presence of Replacement Department of Transportation (D-DOT) labels. The R-DOT label is placed on replacement parts, so this is an indication that the part is not factory original -Considerations for Wear Parts – if using recycled parts that are designed to wear over time, they should have equal wear from side to side. In addition, the age and milage should match the vehicle being repaired or the part being replaced. The insurance company may require the part to be replaced with a part that is the same year or newer -Setting Customer Expectations – when deciding to use recycled parts, it may be helpful to compare the cost with aftermarket and reconditioned parts when available. Customer expectations may differ, depending on the condition and age of the vehicle. Some customers may be less willing to use recycled parts on a one-year old vehicle versus a customer with a seven-year old vehicle -Differences and Similarities Between New and Recycled Parts – -It is important that the customer be informed about the similarities and differences between recycled and factory parts when making a repair decision. Some differences the customer should be aware of include that: -Recycled body parts may require minor repair -New body parts may include a factory warranty against corrosion -New mechanical parts may include a factory warranty -Similarities between new and recycled OEM parts include: -Factory corrosion protection -Proper fit -Proper mounting locations -Both parts are factory parts -Other Considerations for Recycled Parts – -There are additional items to consider when deciding to use recycled parts. For instance, there are certain mechanical parts that should not be used for vehicle repairs, which may include: -A/C parts exposed to moisture, such as an accumulator or compressor -Radiator caps -Worn suspension and brake parts -Bushings -Emission items, such as catalytic converters and charcoal canisters, which cannot be sold according to the Clean Air Act -Tie-rod ends -Sheet metal parts should also not be recycled if they: -Exhibit fire damage, cracks at spot welds or fasteners, or the damage is simply unrepairable -Show improper previous repair -Are missing mounting locations -Have pitting caused by corrosion -High-Strength Steels (HSS) – to meet federal crash and corporate average fuel economy (CAFÉ) standards, vehicle makers are using higher strength steels, which are thinner and lighter than mild steels. These HSS steels come in a variety of thicknesses and strengths. When using HSS parts, note that HSS parts, like mild steel parts, may be used for partial and complete replacement. The vehicle maker’s recommendations must be followed with regard to straightening, welding, sectioning, and complete part installation Parts removal and Ordering Considerations -Recycler and Repair Facility Communication – during the parts ordering process, there needs to be good communication. This ensures that the part being delivered by the recycling facility meets the expectations of the repair facility and that there is no confusion on parts description. Communication tools include: -Websites for online ordering at recycler sites, such as Car-Part.com -Instant messaging -Phone calls -Verify the Proper Part – when ordering recycled parts for a repair, they should match the model and model year, depending on the part. The parts may require matching a specific build date. In some instances, there may be changes in vehicle design. Whenever practical, it is the responsibility of the repair facility, before installation, to determine the usability of the recycled parts, and to ensure the parts will not compromise the repair of the vehicle -Vehicle Cutting – proper cut locations are critical for a proper repair and it is the repairer’s responsibility to determine if a specific cut location is required. Foam location may need to be identified on the request form if the repair facility wishes to preserve a foam-filled area. This may require altering the cutting location. When the repair facility is determining the cut location, the vehicle maker part replacement guidelines should be followed. Depending on the vehicle makers recommended cut line, it may be necessary to acquire two parts from a recycler, even though the repair is specific to just one part. For example, when ordering a B-pillar, the standard cut lines may be in the middle of the front and rear door openings but the shop would like the rear cut line moved back to include the dogleg. This may require purchasing the pillar and quarter panel -Parts Assemblies – Included Parts – parts that are included when ordering assemblies depend on the recycler. The decision is made based on the dismantling procedure and availability, as well as what is undamaged on the donor vehicle. For example, doors may include trim, glass, motors, and switches. However, many recyclers may inventory items separately, such as mirrors, if they are in higher demand. Dash panels may include various electronic parts depending on the removal process. Note that states may have laws on how to transfer VIN plates on recycled dash panels. Body structure assemblies may include exterior panels, interior panels, and reinforcements. Suspension parts may include the strut, coil, and brake assembly. Mechanical part inclusions also may vary. For example, gas tanks may include the fuel filter or fuel pump. What is included should be verified with the recycler -Unitized Structure Parts – recycled parts of a unitized structure are generally supplied as part of an assembly and removed from the vehicle following cut location recommendations from the repair facility. Recycled parts that are part of the unitized structure may include, but are not limited to: -Front and rear rails -A-, B-, and C-pillars -The radiator core support -Bumper reinforcements -Quarter panels -The roof panel -Note: Note that outer quarter panels with rolled hem flanges are not candidates for recycled part usage. This is due to the removal process required. Alternate removal methods will result in a work-hardened flange that may fail -Exterior Panels – exterior panels may be supplied as an assembly with all attached parts. However, the exterior panels may also require the collision repair facility to indicate which pars should be included with the panel. Exterior panels that may be used as recycled parts include: -Deck lids -Hoods -Doors -Fenders -Panoramic roofs. These may be bolted-on or bonded-on, making the part easier to remove compared to welded-on roof panels -Recycled Parts Damage Report Considerations – when including recycled parts on a damage report, consider that the parts may require disassembly for installation and refinishing. Some other considerations may include: -Cleaning -Trimming a part to size -Measuring the part to verify it is undamaged -Parts Removal and Quality Control – recycling facilities employ certain parts removal processes to ensure that the parts they supply are of good quality and can be properly installed -Parts Removal and Quality Control Process – the parts removal process is done by the recycling facility, which requires determining what is recycled off of each vehicle and which parts will be scrapped. This process also involves printing out part tags for the person who dismantles the vehicle. The tags are used to determine which parts are removed from the vehicle and inventoried. All parts must then go through a quality control process that requires. -Cleaning -Inspecting the part for damage -Categorizing the part according to the extent of damage -Making sure the part description matches the actual part condition -Communicating any discrepancies to the repair facility -Parts Inspection Process – part of the inspection process is verifying that the part has not been previously repaired and is not an aftermarket part. To check for previous repairs, a recycling facility may: -Check the panel backside -Look for corrosion, different color primer, and/or weld marks -Check paint film thickness on the panel surface -Note: A recycling facility may notify the buyer of previous repairs, whether the panel has been simply refinished or refinished and repaired. If the part is not factory, and has been deemed an aftermarket part, this should also be disclosed to the buyer -Ordering Parts – parts are typically ordered by category type, such as body, electrical/mechanical, and miscellaneous. In some instances, using a recycled assembly is preferable since it eliminates the need for having to order and assemble parts individually. In addition, the repair facility should determine if a partial assembly is available, if that is all that is needed. This may be more cost-friendly than ordering a complete assembly. Note that when ordering parts, reference the vehicle service information to determine if one-time-use fasteners need to be ordered -Part Grades- the following describes the four different ARA part grades: -A Grade – one unit of repair, less than one unit of repair, or ‘clean and undamaged.’ A non-mechanical part that is labeled as A grade may also be listed using the code 000 -B Grade – two units of repair -C Grade – more than two units of repair -X Grade – not enough data to grade the part, essentially an ungraded part -ARA Code and Panel Damage Overview – the ARA Code is a three-character code that serves as an important tool for assessing the condition of a recycled part. The first character, also called position, identifies the damage location. The second position is a letter that refers to the type of damage. There are 15 codes for identifying the various types of damage. The last position identifies the extent of the damage by measuring it in repair units. A repair unit represents damage that does not exceed surface area size similar to a standard credit card. Note: The locator sheet and damage type codes can be downloaded at the ARA website, and is a good resource for understanding the ARA parts grading system -Returning Ordered Parts – in instances where it has been decided not to use the part, the repair facility should send the part back in a similar condition as it was received. Both the repairer and recycler should be in agreement on the condition of any part that is going to be returned. Modifications made toa part may devalue it. Also, if the part is brokered, it is unlikely it can be sent back since it will be different than the original part shipped. If it has been agreed that parts can be removed from an assembly and the remaining portion returned to the recycler, adjacent panels that can be resold should not be damaged during the part removal process Recycled Parts Considerations (2/2) Recycled Parts and Installation Considerations Inspecting Received Parts -Part Inspecting During Delivery – when receiving the part at the collision repair facility, make sure the damage code matches the actual condition of the part. While this is generally done at the recycling facility, it should be done when the part is received by the repair facility as well. When inspecting the part, try to have the delivery driver present. Additionally, be mindful that variances in part descriptions may lead to returns or price negotiations. With regard to cycle time, it may be quicker to repair a part with more damage than anticipated than wait for a replacement part -Inspecting the Part Match – parts may appear the same on the outside, but have a different interior (such as a door). This may require removing the electronics, mechanical parts, and trim pieces from the damaged part and transferring them to the replacement part. Some repairers/insurers may do this as part of their repair policy. When inspecting the part: -It needs to be as good as or better than the part being replaced before it was collision damaged -The repair facility must ensure the recycled part matches the condition and integrity of the original Installing Recycled Panels and Assemblies -Installing Multi-Layered Assemblies – some assemblies, such as rocker panels, pillars, roof rails, and front and rear rails have multi-layered assemblies. This type of construction may make the installation process difficult since: -Inner panels and reinforcements may need to be accessed for joining. -Several access windows may be required on several parts of the assembly -Multi-layered construction requires using offset joints. Multiple offset joints may not be practical -Note: Welded-on parts are generally provided as part of a larger assembly. If only using a portion of the assembly, such as an outer panel, removal of spot welds will be required. This typically results in holes being drilled in the flange area of the service part. Note that this may not be allowed due to the attachment method stated in the vehicle makers repair procedure -Multi-Layered Assembly Determinations – if it has been determined that installing a multi-layered assembly is acceptable, high-strength steel (HSS) reinforcements may not have a sectioning procedure, requiring replacement at factory seams to maintain structural integrity. Sectioning should only be performed when allowed by the vehicle maker. It should also be determined where the sectioning joints can be properly protected from corrosion. In some cases, the outer panels may have to be sacrificed or removed and replaced to access inner panels for joining or sectioning -Multi-Layered Assembly Structure – installing large, welded structural assemblies, such as full-front or full-rear body sections, involves making multiple joints in multiple structural panels and reinforcements. On many vehicles, the panels in the vehicle side structure are made from high- and ultra-high-strength steels that contribute to the structural integrity and occupant safety of the vehicle. Introducing multiple sectioning joints may affect the performance of the vehicle structure during normal operation, as well as during another collision. Most vehicle makers have published warnings against doing full-body sectioning on their vehicles -Bolted-On Unitized Structure Parts and Assemblies – bolted-on unitized structure parts often have design changes from year to year, as well as during model changes. These assemblies also vary in type depending on options and powertrain configurations. When bolt-on recycled parts are being considered for use, it is essential that they are inspected to make sure there are no issues with: -VIN labels -Powertrain and suspension mounting locations and brackets -Indirect damage -Physical condition -Mid-year design changes -Vehicle warranties -Note: Bolted-on unitized structure parts may include engine cradles, crossmembers, and suspension assemblies -Aluminum Structures – aluminum vehicle structures can also be recycled. However, similar to steel, aluminum structures require following specific replacement procedures that are provided by the vehicle maker. How these parts are attached to the vehicle may differ compared to their steel counterparts. Aluminum unitized structural parts may require: -Specific fasteners and welding techniques -Drilling out various types of rivets and replacing with recommended fasteners -Note: When using vehicle makers recommendations to replace aluminum parts, the original attachment is not always duplicated Additional Parts Inspection Criteria -Recycled Glass – recycled glass includes stationary glass such as windshields and side glass, or moveable glass such as door glass. Some encapsulated glass may not be able to be removed without destroying the encapsulation. Whether or not the glass can be reused once removed is indicated in the service information. When ordering a windshield, note that there are various glass configurations and designs based on different vehicle options, for example, advanced driver assist systems (ADAS). When inspecting glass for use, make sure to avoid glass that has: -Visible damage -Delamination -Improper tint or shade -Note: Always reference vehicle maker service information to identify the glass replacement requirements and system calibrations that are required prior to starting glass repairs -Mechanical Parts – commonly recycled mechanical parts include parts related to the following systems: -Air conditioning -Heating/cooling -Suspension -Powertrain -Note: When inspecting recycled mechanical parts, keep in mind that some may need to go through a remanufacturing process -Engines – while specific procedures may vary according to recycling facility standard operating procedures (SOPs), recycled engines are typically cleaned and quality checked, including testing for carbon, oil pressure, and compression -Halfshafts and Driveshafts – -When inspecting halfshafts for use, do not install halfshafts with: -Evidence of heating, welding, or damage -A damaged or misshapened boot -Evidence of CV-joint contamination -On driveshafts, do not install parts with: -Damage, evidence of repair, or corrosion -Any play between the driveshaft and the U-joints -Runout exceeding the vehicle makers specification -Note: Also, be sure to replace U-joints on recycled driveshafts -Exhaust Systems to Avoid – when inspecting exhaust system parts, do not use parts that have: -Excessive corrosion -Flow restrictions -Damaged or missing mounting points -Physical damage -Note: In addition, be sure not to use recycled gaskets or catalytic converters -Inspecting Anti-Lock Brake System (ABS) Parts – when utilizing recycled anti-lock braking system (ABS) parts for installation, remember that parts cannot be flood damaged, and any parts that come in contact with brake fluid need to have been sealed after removal. Additionally, parts taken from the donor vehicle should come from the side away from the area of direct damage. All parts should be tested for proper operation following installation -Suspension Parts – when using recycled suspension parts, compare to the recycled part to an undamaged part to verify that it has the proper dimensions and is the correct part. Inspect for bends or cracks, and use dye penetrant if necessary. Do not install the part if there is evidence of damage, previous repairs, or any signs of heating, welding, or straightening. Also, make sure the suspension part has similar wear to the suspension on the opposite side of the vehicle -Control Modules – when using recycled control modules, it is important to confirm with the recycler that they were tested for proper operation before the vehicle was dismantled. Remember to confirm proper operation of all systems being monitored or controlled by the module being replaced. Always reference vehicle maker service information to identify required service, testing, and calibration procedures. Note that not all system malfunctions will turn on a malfunction indicator lamp (MIL. Therefore, use of a scan tool that is capable of performing the necessary service, testing, and calibration may be required -Wiring Harnesses – depending on the recycling facility, wiring harnesses may not be inventoried. Usually wiring harnesses will stay with the vehicle in the yard and are removed upon request by the customer. Some recycling facilities may include restraint system wiring harnesses. However, if there is damage to the harness, some vehicle makers do not allow repair. Others have specific kits that must be used to make repairs. Some vehicle makers allow only one splice per section of wire. If the recycled wire harness has minor damage, note that wire harness repair options vary according to the vehicle maker and the type of electronic system. Also, note that wire damage on the pigtail of control modules should not be repaired Refinishing Overview Finish Types -Refinishing Overview – one of the final stages of the collision repair process is to refinish the damaged area of the vehicle. The refinishing department is most often identified by the spraybooth and an adjacent prep deck. The refinishing department receives the vehicle from the non-structural or structural repair department, and performs the refinishing operations such as masking, scuffing, sanding, and applying primers and topcoats. The refinish: -Will be the first item the customer inspects when they pick up the vehicle from the collision repair facility -Requires a proper color match and no finish defects -Types of OEM Finishes – there are single-stage, basecoat/clearcoat, tri-coat, and multi-stage finishes, depending on the number of finish layers above the primer coating. Single-stage finishes, which include just a colored finish coat as the final coating layer, are used on utility vehicles where appearance is not an issue. Basecoat/clearcoat (two-stage) finishes, which have a colored basecoat, followed by a clearcoat, are common on passenger vehicles. Tri-coat (three-stage) finishes, which add a translucent midcoat between the basecoat and clearcoat, are found on luxury vehicles. Multi-stage (four-stage) finishes, which add a midcoat and tinted clearcoat between the basecoat and clearcoat, are only found on a select few luxury vehicles -Single-Stage and Basecoat/Clearcoat – -Single-stage refinishing coats are a one-step color coat designed to dry to a glossy finish. There is no clear topcoat applied. This type of finish has limited use. Basecoat material is the color coat in a finish coat application process and is made up of color pigments to match various vehicle colors. Basecoats are: -Not designed to provide a gloss appearance -Followed by an application of clearcoat -Either a solid color, metallic, or mica -Clearcoat is the final protective layer in a two-, three-, or four-stage topcoat system. Clearcoats are used to: -Provide basecoat protection against the sun’s ultraviolet (UV) rays. This protection keeps the basecoat from delaminating, peeling, and turning hazy -Protect against abrasions and damage to the basecoat -Enhance the appearance and color of the basecoat -Tri-Coat and Multi-Stage – tri-coat and multi-stage finishes utilize one or more midcoats between the basecoat and the clearcoat. The mid-coats are typically translucent colors, which allow light to show through, providing depth to the finish. These midcoats may also contain mica, which is the additive used to create pearl coatings. It adds a metallic sheen to the appearance of a finish. Multi-stage finishes consist of a basecoat, two or more tinted midcoats, and clearcoat, providing even more depth than a tri-coat system -Identifying Finish Type – the paint code is a label that identifies the color that was originally applied to the vehicle. Paint code label location varies depending on vehicle make and model. Some locations include: -Inside the glove box -On door pillars -Inside the trunk -Note: Label location information can be found in estimating guides, repair guides, and paint maker chip guides. Paint codes are used by the refinishing technician to mix the proper color formula, for which there can be multiple variants -Terminology – this section covers some of the more common terms used during the refinishing process -Jambing/Edging – jambing, or edging, is refinishing edges such as doorjambs and panel backsides. Jambing may be done before some parts are bolted or welded on the vehicle. It is typically done on areas that cannot be easily accessed or refinished after they are installed -Spot Repair – a spot repair is generally repairing a small area. It begins by making the cosmetic repair, cleaning the surface, priming, and applying topcoats to a small area -Panel Refinishing – panel refinishing or a panel repair is the refinishing of a complete part that is separated by a panel break or feature line. Panel refinishing requires that surrounding panels be either masked or blended into, depending on the difficulty of color match -Featheredge – featheredging is used to gradually taper out the repair area so there is a smooth area with no lines that can show through a finish. A featheredge is made by sanding to taper the repair area. It is so-called because the transition between the different layers is smooth without ridges, like a feather. The featheredge is started over the repair area and worked outward, revealing a small part of each coating layer -Tinting – the color mixed from the paint code does not always match the vehicle color. Tinting is changing the appearance of a color by adding small amounts of different toners to the original formula. The object of tinting is to bring the mixed color closer to matching the vehicle. Tinting is not done with every repair. Tinting should only be done as a last resort -Refinishing Process Overview – there are multiple steps involved in the refinishing process -Masking – masking is the application of paper or plastic material and masking tape to cover areas of the vehicle that will not be refinishing. This protects these areas from overspray. There is also a water-based liquid masking available that is sprayed on the surface and washed off when refinishing operations are complete -Sanding – sanding levels minor imperfections in the surface. Sanding can be done by hand or with a machine. There are many types of sanding grits available, ranging from coarse to very fine, depending on the grading system used. Sanding is done dry or wet. Wet sanding requires sandpaper designed for wet sanding. The surface is kept constantly wet while sanding. Some product makers require soaking the sandpaper before use -Scuffing – scuffing is the least aggressive form of surface preparation. Scuffing is done without creating scratches or breaking into the underlying coat. It is used, for example, to remove the gloss from the finish. Scuffing may be done using a woven plastic scuff pad, fine-grit wet or dry sanding paper, or a paste-type sanding material. Scuffing pads are typically not identified by grit, but will be color-coded or labeled as coarse to ultra-fine -Priming – priming may be done to provide a corrosion-resistant barrier, or to fill minor surface imperfections -Drying, Curing, and Baking – after refinish materials are applied, there are two processes that occur, drying and curing. Drying is the complete evaporation of solvents and liquids from the refinish material. Curing is when a chemical change occurs and the material hardens. Baking is the process of accelerating the drying and curing time in a spraybooth. During the bake cycle, the temperature inside the spraybooth is increased, thus the term “baking” -Blending Overview – blending is often done when applying basecoats because panel-to-panel matches are nearly impossible with many colors. Blending helps achieve the best possible color match by tricking the eye into seeing one color. Any slight visible differences between the original finish and the refinish are disguised because some of the original finish shows through the refinish color -Purpose – blending the basecoat: -Extends the basecoat color into an area or panel adjacent to the repair -Allows some of the original vehicle color to show through the refinish color. The refinish color does not have to be an exact match, and likely will not be. It just has to be a blendable match -Can help disguise slight color differences that would be apparent if panel-painting to an edge -Limitations – blending does have limitations. For example: -Successful blends are very dependent on using good spray gun control and spray technique -Blending will not hide a severe color mismatch. Blending refinish colors that are not blendable may cause mismatch problems, for example, when looking from the front end to the rear end of the vehicle -Blending can never take the place of tinting to correct for an unacceptable color match. It is also true that tinting cannot take the place of blending. There are reasons for doing each process, and one cannot substitute for the other -Preparing Parts for Paint – when preparing to refinish parts or panels, there are some things to consider -Previously Refinished Areas – previously refinished areas may: -Have multiple layers of material built up -Be dry, but not completely cured -Have poor adhesion qualities -Require partial finish removal because of excessive film thickness or improper material application -Have an acceptable film thickness that will allow topcoat application -Note: When refinishing a panel that was previously refinished, it may be helpful to know what paint system was used, if possible -Products Over Bare Steel – when refinishing over bare steel, there may be some additional products that need to be considered include: -Metal preparation/conversion coatings. These coatings may be used before epoxy primer, but are generally not used with self-etching primer or body filler -Zinc chromate/phosphate primers, which cover the substrate, but do not etch into the surface -Direct-to-metal or etching primers -Epoxy primers -Urethane and 2K primers that are easy to sand, provide high build, and have minimal shrinkage. A sealer may not be required if these primers are used -Undercoat Considerations – undercoats, such as primer-surfacers and sealers, may be tinted or may be tintable with single-stage color. Colored undercoats: -Can be used to improve a color match in translucent basecoats. If the undercoat color is not considered during refinishing, it may be difficult to match the vehicle color -Can be used to improve a poor hiding characteristic of some basecoats -Should be used when recommended by the paint or vehicle maker -Note: The vehicle maker may have used a tinted undercoat. Undercoat color can be determined by reading the featheredges -Plastic Refinishing Considerations – when refinishing plastic parts, considerations include: -Identifying the type of plastic material used. Categories include rigid vs. flexible. -Paint maker recommendations for plastic cleaners or other preparation steps -Determining if an adhesion promoter must be applied to the surface before coating application. Adhesion promoters are typically required on polyolefin -Rigid Plastics – rigid plastic parts may include: -Sheet-molded compounds (SMC) -Fiberglass -Polycarbonate -Note: Before refinishing plastic, the refinish technician should determine if the refinish material will require the use of a flex additive -Flexible Plastics – -Flexible plastic parts may include: -Polyamide -Polyurethane -Thermo-polyurethane -Some Common parts include bumper covers and body trim. Before any work or refinishing of these products can begin, determine: -If the refinish material will require flex additive -The preparation steps. An interior part may be prepared differently from an exterior part -Paint Maker Warranties – paint makers generally have warranties addressing the durability of any refinish. However, the refinish must be performed to their standards by a qualified repair facility. The terms of the warranty vary by company, some lasting for as long as the customer owns the vehicle. The warranty covers issues such as: -Peeling or delamination -Cracking or checking -Loss of gloss -Fading or chalking Refinishing -Seam Sealers – seam sealer are applied to seams, such as a pinchweld. -Purpose – the purpose of seam sealers it to: -Reduces the chances of corrosion in a flange and in joints. The purpose is NOT to fill in gaps or poorly fitted joints, but to complete the seal on the joint -Seal out moisture and contaminants from these joining areas -Stop water and air leaks -Prevent fumes from entering the passenger compartment -Reduces wind and road noise -Note: Seam sealers also add to the appearance of the seam -Locations of Use – seam sealers may be used: -On a welded seam where leakage could be an issue -On closure panel openings -Around lamps -In the engine compartment, including on the cowl, around strut towers, and the apron-to-lower rail joint. Any seam sealer will work for underhood applications. Epoxy-, urethane-, and solvent-based seam sealers are all resistant to gasoline, oil, and other fluids and can take underhood temperatures -On floor pans -On quarter panels -Around the fuel filler neck -Mixing of Refinish Color – the refinish color must be mixed using a formula that matches and the paint code. Multiple colored toners are used for custom mixing of thousands of colors in any amount needed to achieve the proper match with the existing finish -Sprayout Panels – making sprayout panels is an important step in determining if a refinish color is going to achieve a blendable color match, as it helps determine when the refinishing technician has a color that is a good match. It also shows how many coats of color are needed to achieve proper coverage. The panel must be made duplicating the actual spraying conditions and technique that will be used on the vehicle -Corrosion Protection – this section discusses anti-corrosion compound material -Anti-Corrosion Compound -anti-corrosion compound material: -Is typically a wax-based coating, though a coating using thin-film technology is not wax-based -Is called several names by product makers, including anti-rust agent, rust preventer, etc. -Is applied as a fine mist with a wand attached to a special spray gun or an aerosol can -Has self-healing capabilities -Location – anti-corrosion compound is typically applied inside non-visible areas, such as inside pillars, rocker panels, and rails. Most anti-corrosion compound has creeping capabilities, which allows it to penetrate pinchweld flanges, such as on rail flanges and the lower rocker panel. Anti-corrosion compound is also applied in the bottom perimeter of door shell cavities, on the backside of panel repairs, and aluminum cavities, not just steel. One vehicle maker, for example, states in their service information that after all straightening or welding work on aluminum parts, the cavities affected must be sealed with a cavity protection agent after being painted. Another vehicle maker, in the service information, states to treat all interior surfaces that have been disturbed by repairs. This includes all box members, cavities, and door interiors -Undercoating Material Overview – undercoating material: -Is a thick tar- oy synthetic rubber-based material -Is applied to wheelhouse and underbody areas, as recommended by the vehicle maker. The bottom of the fuel tank is another area commonly recommended for undercoating application -Protects against abrasion from stone chips and other road debris, and corrosion -May solvent- or water-based. Solvent-based undercoating may have some wax to keep the material flexible in cold temperatures -Can be applied over primer. Some can be applied over bare steel. Check the product maker recommendations -Has varying thicknesses, colors, and consistencies to match to match the OEM and aftermarket appearance -Undercoating Material Characteristics – characteristics of undercoating generally include: -Resistance to road splash -Resistance to oils and solvents -An ability to creep into hard-to-reach areas. Hard-to-reach areas include flanges and under inserts. The material should be sprayed at the correct viscosity to allow it to flow through the spray wand with the proper atomization for thorough coverage -Self-healing. If the material is scratched, some products will flow back into the scratched area -Serving as a sound deadener -Custom Finish Overview – custom painting is the process of applying a unique finish to a vehicle, one that is different from the standard finish that was applied by the vehicle maker. If you encounter a custom finish, it is always a good idea to consult with your paint staff and/or management to determine the best course of action Tools and Equipment -Tools and Equipment – in this section, we will cover the main tools and equipment used during refinishing operations -Spraybooth Functions – a spraybooth provides: -A clean, airtight spray environment -The ability to control the temperatures for spraying and baking -Limited exposure to hazardous chemicals -Fire protection -Color-corrected lighting for color matching -Prep Deck – prep decks may appear similar in appearance to a spraybooth, the difference being that a prep deck typically has curtains and not solid walls. Prep decks may: -Be used as a sanding station -Allow refinish materials to be applied -Be heated -Be used for edging parts -Be regulated by local rules -Note: Local or national fire codes may regulate the types of duties that may be performed inside a prep deck -Mixing Room – mixing rooms contain the materials and equipment needed for refinish operations. The paint mixing room is designed to: -Be self-ventilating -Contain any spills that occur -Meet local fire codes -Be grounded to avoid sparks and explosions -Have explosion-proof wiring -Spray Gun Washer – spray gun washers are used for the cleaning of spray equipment. The spray gun washer on the left is used for waterborne refinish materials, while the one on the right is used for solvent-borne refinish materials -Used Paint, Solvent Containment, and Solvent Recyclers – used material containers are designed for holding small amounts of waste for a short period of time. These containers may also: -Contain a double strainer for collecting material -Hold used material until placing into larger holding drums -Note: When using a used solvent container, it is a safe practice to use a system that has a cover and keeps fumes from escaping. If an uncovered container is used, the fumes can cause a fire and health hazard Reliable Automotive Class in shop 4/6/2023 Stud welding on aluminum and steel -Vehicles have such as Audi. -This is not stud weld puller this is the studs on rear body panel for Audi -99% of dents on aluminum are microcracked -Do attemptive repair -Very hard to cold pull aluminum -need 1mm on the attachment otherwise it wont be correct 233680 140335 0 0 127635 193675 0 0 648335 298450 0 0 287020 272415 0 0 -The screw stops it from turning – just needs to be snug – do not over tighten 595630 287655 0 0 127635 213360 0 0 803275 -259080 0 0 233680 332740 0 0 -Top right of this attachment is the stopper so you can set this on uneven terrain/angle. The line coming off is the wire for reference of the tool. You can lock the attaching part for guidance. Push both ends down – touching the panel so its level -Different cylinders/nozzle heads for this -Aluminum and Steel are different when it comes to stud welding -Machine arcs to heat -Steel and Aluminum -Aluminum is a quick cool weld -Can do a destructive test weld, to ensure proper install, use a damaged panel that is removed and to test it, the stud should break off and the head should stay on. If the stud falls off completely during the test, the settings need to be adjusted using the guide -Projection P (MM) -sheet – 2mm – stud sticking up -Lift adjustment – scale on the back of gun with the white line – need 0 lined up with 0 for example. this typically does not get adjusted so leave it where it is, unless it specifies otherwise but please check beforehand. The setting is lockable -Resilience scale – dial on the back – 6 over the top of white line – check settings for whats needed -Polarity Reversed – reverses stud and clamp. Ground becomes gun and burns deeper. -If nothing is marked on the sheet – aluminum – becomes standard polarity -Swap lines on machine -Gas is used on aluminum -No gas on steel / does not, if you know how to use your settings *We should able the machine, sheet, gun to avoid confusion -Aluminum needs to be 100% perfect clean to prevent oxidation -Clean with solvent and degrease before using stainless steel brush -Brushing the panel – needs to be white so you can see pure aluminum -Aluminum is one of the fastest oxidation around. You have a few minutes after brushing -Brush only where the stud is going -Studs – like rivets – order extras -Sheet – was made for Audi. Sheet is a guidelines -Failed Studs – show as a half circle on the back of the panel. like a half moon. -Good studs – show a complete bump on the back of the panel. like a full circle -Hammer and Dolly – cannot hammer and dolly on aluminum – it becomes work hardened -Grounding on aluminum – put in conspicuous locations such as belt mldg removal – (If I heard that correctly) -Sand to bare metal first -Standard Polarity – no power until gun is applied 403860 297180 0 0 -Tab 478155 207645 0 0 488950 90170 0 0 -Scuff the side that touches -These are reusable, install and remove straight on -Reuse by removing the end. Remove by cutting off with pliers. If you pull it, it will remove material and warp the panel. use a body file to remove the existing tab on the panel -Do not use rolox – rolox uses a lot of heat -R – rotated – can put pin thru -S – no difference. It is preference. How you want to pin. -If you cant weld on, you are pushing too hard. Restraint System -Airbag Module – is a passive restraint that activates when a vehicle is involved in a collision. -Clock Spring – is a spiral-wound rotary electrical connector, located between the steering wheel and steering column, which allows the steering wheel to turn while maintaining an electrical connection with the airbag, horn, and other devices. -Collapsible Steering Column – An energy absorbing, or collapsing, steering column is designed to collapse during a collision to reduce driver injury. -Upper Column – Steering columns may be designed to collapse in the upper column. Some upper columns have two shafts that are designed to function similarly to a telescope during a collision. This type of design uses a solid shaft that compresses into a hollow shaft to shorten the overall length of the steering column. The shafts may be locked with plastic inserts that shear off upon impact. Upper steering columns may also be designed with steel mesh or accordion-like convolutions that collapse under collision forces. -Lower Steering Sections – The steering column may also be designed to collapse in the lower steering sections. These sections may be linked by offset universal joints to allow the sections to fold during an impact. This keeps the lower steering column from entering the passenger compartment. -Mounting Bracket – The steering column may be designed to collapse at the steering column mounting brackets. Some steering columns are designed to collapse at the bracket that holds the column to the instrument panel frame. This may also be done with plastic inserts that shear upon impact. -Deploying Restraints – Deployment of the restraints may be based on the perceived severity of the collision, deceleration rate, seat belt use, occupant position, and passenger occupant weight. Following deployment, the Restraint Control Module (RCM) may also communicate with the Body Control Module (BCM) to turn on the interior lights and unlock the doors. The Restraint Control Module (RCM) may also initiate a call to 911 through systems like OnStar. -Dual Stage Airbag – The function of a dual stage airbag is to deploy at a reduced force compared to a single stage airbag. It requires two separate igniters and wire harness connectors. This allows the restraint system ECM to deploy whichever inflator is required depending on the crash parameters. Depending on the vehicle maker’s design and programmed crash parameters, dual stage airbags may activate either as a single, reduced-charge deployment, or from different ignitors simultaneously or staggered. Identifying Dual Stage Airbag can be done by referencing vehicle marker service information and looking for two igniter connections on the backside of the airbag module. -Ignitors and Inflators – the Ignitor receives a signal from the Restraint Control Module (RCM) , which then initiates the airbag Inflator -Occupant Classification System (OCS) – is used to determine if the front passenger restraints should be activated. The OCS uses sensors and a control module to provide information directly to the Restraint Control Module (RCM), which controls the Safety Restraint System (SRS). -OCS Weight Sensors – various methods are used to determine front passenger occupant weight for the OCS, including a silicone-filled pressure bladder, a sensor mat, or strain gauges. Always refer to the vehicle maker service information to determine the type of system, mandatory replacement items, and calibration requirements before repairing any OCS. An OCS may also use various other sensors. These include the – Seat belt-use sensor to determine if the seat belt is in use, Seat-position sensor to determine how close the occupant is to the airbag, Status lamp on the instrument panel or rearview mirror to communicate the status of the passenger airbag. -OCS Control Module- An OCS will typically include a separate control module that communicates with the RCM. It may be located under the front passenger seat or under the center console. -Impact and Safing Sensors – Restraint system sensors include front, side, and safing or arming sensors. These sensors monitor vehicle conditions to detect sudden deceleration in a collision. The sensor then sends a signal to the restraint system control module (RCM) to determine if an airbag should be deployed. -Front Impact Sensors- detect front collisions and are located on the front portion of the vehicle. Front Impact Sensor locations may include – On the front lower rails, On the radiator core support, Behind the headlamps, On the front frame rail crossmember. -Side Impact Sensors – located on both sides of the vehicle, are designed to detect side impact, and may be mounted in doors, on B and C pillar, behind or under seats, on the rear wheelhouse. Some vehicles use a pressure-based side impact sensor, located in the doors. These types of sensors are designed to detect a quick increase of pressure inside the door cavity during a side impact. These types of side impacts have a faster response time, but require other impact sensors located in other areas in case the door is not impacted during a collision. -Safing or Arming Sensor – is a secondary sensor that must close with the front or side impact sensors to confirm that a collision is taking place. This is done to prevent an accidental deployment caused by a problem in the front impact sensor circuits. Safing or Arming sensors may be located inside the Restraint Control Module (RCM) or as a separate sensor in the passenger compartment. Some systems use three separate sensors to determine airbag deployment. -Knee Bolsters and Knee Bolster Airbags – The knee bolster is designed into the lower portion of the instrument panel. It may provide an extra cushioned area to protect the knees and prevent sliding under the instrument panel during a collision. -Seat Airbag – require removal of the seat to replace deployed side airbags. -Seat Position Sensor (SPS) – determines the distance between the steering wheel and the driver -Side Airbag – deployment usually requires replacement of – side airbag module, side-impact sensor, any damaged wiring, damaged seat parts on vehicles with a seat mounted side airbag. Some vehicle manufacturers require replacement of the entire seat assembly following a deployment. -System Faults – Most Restraint Control Module (RCM) perform a self-diagnostic test when the ignition key is turned on. If the RCM is not working properly, or if it detects a problem with the restraint system, the airbag warning light will illuminate and remain lit until the problem is corrected. An airbag warning lamp that does not illuminate during the initial bulb check sequence may also indicate a problem. -Restraint Control Module (RCM) – processes crash data to determine which restraints should be deployed. RCM is considered the brains behind the Supplemental Restraint System (SRS). Functions of the RCM include – deploying restraints, checking for system faults, processing information from various input sources, storing information from the collision, storing energy to deploy restraints if battery power is lost during a collision. The mounting location of the RCM may include, but are not limited to – under the lower center position of the instrument panel, under the center console – between the front seats, under a seat, behind a kick panel. -Restraint System Servicing – damaged or deployed restraint systems almost always set a diagnostic trouble code (DTC). However, it is important to remember not all DTC’s will turn on a Malfunction Indicator Lamp (MIL). Therefore, the first steps when servicing vehicle restraint systems should be performing a system scan. This will allow you to retrieve stored DTC’s, perform system diagnostics, and may help identify damaged system components that may not have visible signs of damage. Restraint Systems Operation (1/2) Seat Belt and Roll Bar Operation Overview -Vehicle Restraint Systems – Vehicles equipped with various mechanical and electronic restraint systems, which protect occupants during a collision. These systems include: -Airbags -Collapsible steering column -Headrests -Roll bars -Seats -Seat belts -Seat belt pre-tensioners -Note: The restraint systems mentioned are considered passive safety features, as they help protect the vehicle occupants from injury once a crash has already occurred. Safety features such as forward collision warning systems, anti-lock brakes, stability control, and lane departure warning systems, are active safety features, as they help to prevent collisions Seat Belts -Seat Belts – seat belts reduce the injuries to vehicle occupants resulting from impact with interior items, keep the occupants positioned correctly, and prevent the occupants from being ejected from the vehicle, in the event of a crash. A vehicle maker may require replacement of all seat belts that were in use during an airbag deployment or collision. Always reference vehicle maker service information to identify service requirements following a collision -Importance of Seat Belts – to understand the important of seat belts in the safety restraint system, consider that an occupant in a vehicle is traveling at the same speed as the vehicle. When the vehicle suddenly stops due to a crash, the occupant continues traveling at the same rate of speed. The seat belt applies an opposing force to hold the occupant in the vehicle and positioned correctly to maximize the effectiveness of airbag systems -Seat Belt Retractors – the seat belt retractors main function is to wind the seat belt into the assembly, allowing it to be pulled out. Seat belt retractors may have other functions, such as emergency locking and automatic locking. Most retractors are designed to be used on only one side of the vehicle and are not interchangeable -Emergency Locking – most retractors have the emergency locking feature, and are referred to as emergency locking retractors (ELR). Many retractors have a pendulum that causes the webbing to lock when the webbing is extracted from the retractor quickly. The webbing may also lock when the speed of the vehicle changes abruptly or when the vehicle is on a steep upgrade or downgrade, cornering hard, or during a roll over -Automatic Locking – retractors that have the automatic locking feature are commonly referred to as automatic locking retractors (ALR). These types of retractors allow occupants and child safety seats to be held tightly in place. Once the seat belt has been fully extended and the tongue is inserted into the buckle, the ALR allows the extra seat belt webbing to retract into the retractor so that it is tight around the car seat or occupant. At this point, a bar locks into a spool with gears, preventing additional seat belt webbing from being released. Some vehicle makers refer to these as child hold-out or cinch mechanisms. Note: To disengage an ALR, unbuckle the seat belt and allow it to retract fully -Load-Limiting Capabilities – some seat belts have load-limiting capabilities that release the seat belt, at a determined rate, when it becomes locked during a collision or sudden stop. These seat belts reduce the force exerted on the occupant by absorbing some of the force created from the momentum of the occupant. Load-limiting seat belts should be inspected for signs of strain or activation. For example, check for signs of strain on the seat belt webbing and proper retractor operation. Some load limiting seat belts use a torsion bar made of relatively soft metal that can bend when this feature is activated -Head Restraints – another supplemental restraint system (SRS) component, in the area of seats and seat belts, is head restraint systems, commonly referred to as headrests. These restraint systems can be manually adjustable, contain reactive mechanical linkages, or be proactive systems that move automatically to aid in protecting occupants when a collision occurs Seat Belt Pre-Tensioner Operation -Seat Belt Pre-Tensioner Description – seat belt pre-tensioners remove seat belt slack to hold the vehicle occupants in the proper position during a collision. Generally, this systems uses restraint system sensors and the restraint control module (RCM) to determine which systems need to be deployed. For example, based on input from restraint system sensors, the RCM may determine the seat belt pre-tensioner needs to deploy, but not deploy the airbags. The RCM may also work with the occupant classification system (OCS) to determine if the front passenger restraint systems should deploy. Note: During deployment, expanding gas may be used to move mechanical parts; as depicted on screen -Types of Seat Belt Pre-Tensioners – although seat belt pre-tensioners have the same purpose, they may function differently and therefore, are specific to vehicle make, model, and position within the passenger compartment. Seat belt pre-tensioners may work by: -Winding the seat belt retractor -Shortening the seat belt buckle assembly with a piston and cable system -Shortening at the seat belt anchoring point -Deploying the seat belt pre-tensioner at the retractor and buckle assembly or anchoring point simultaneously -Note: There are also other less-common deployment methods, such as motorized pre-tensioners. Always refer to vehicle maker service information to determine the type of seat belt pre-tensioner you are working with Roll Bars -Pop-Up Roll Bars – pop-up roll bars are common on convertible vehicles, may be made of aluminum or steel, and deploy using hydraulic cylinders or compressed springs. A pop-up roll bar system may have one bar that extends the width of the vehicle, or two individual bars located on the right and left sides of the vehicle -Pop-Up Roll Bar Activation – pop-up roll bar systems utilize sensors such as yaw rate sensors, lateral accelerometers, and sensor that monitor suspension to chassis position change. These sensors are integrated with the RCM and detect when a rollover is imminent. There are multiple requirements that must occur at the same time in order for roll bar activation to occur. Roll bars will not activate unless all necessary criteria are met such as vehicle speed, deceleration, and roll angle -Stationary Roll Bars – some vehicles use stationary roll bars, which are also designed to limit occupant injury during a vehicle rollover. These roll bars will not pop-up, but are a part of the vehicles profile Restraint Systems Operation (2/2) Airbag Operation Airbags -Airbag Systems Overview – the airbag is a type of vehicle safety device designed to inflate rapidly, and then deflate quickly during a collision -Seat Position Sensor – the seat position sensor (SPS) determines the distance between the steering wheel and the driver -Restraint Control Module (RCM) – the RCM processes pre-crash data to determine which restraints should be deployed -Airbag Modules – airbag modules are typically the most visible part of an airbag system, and mounting locations may include the steering wheel, instrument panel, seats, door panels, or headliner. These airbag modules may include the airbag, inflator module, electrical connectors, and trim covers. Airbag modules are passive restraints that activate when a vehicle is involved in a collision. Unlike seat belts, which only work if the driver or passenger buckle up, airbags are designed to activate automatically. Once activated, the airbag is designed to inflate very quickly, and then deflate almost immediately; the smoke or dust seen during deployment is actually the packing powder/lubricant -Ignitors and Inflators – when the RCM determines it is necessary to deploy an airbag, it sends a signal to the ignitor, which initiates the airbag inflators. An inflator supplies the gas required to inflate an airbag. Conventional inflators use an electrical current to activate an igniter, which starts the burning of sodium pellets, creating nitrogen gas to fill the airbag. Hybrid inflators use an electrical current to energize an initiator, which causes the propellant to ignite, releasing compressed argon gas to fill the airbag. This type of igniter also heats the gas for faster inflation. The repair and service procedures are the same for both systems -Clock Spring – a clock spring is a spiral-wound rotary electrical connector, located between the steering wheel and steering column, which allows the steering wheel to turn while maintaining an electrical connection with the airbag, horn, and other devices. Some vehicles may integrate the clock spring and steering angle sensor into a single part. Always refer to vehicle maker service information for required replacement, service, and calibration information -Direction of Impact – determining thee direction of impact may help to determine the deployment of restraint systems. For example: -A front impact may deploy the front airbags and seat belt pre-tensioners or only the seat belt pre-tensioners -A front/side impact may deploy the front and side airbags or only the seat belt pre-tensioners -A side impact may deploy the side airbags, curtain airbags, and seat belt pre-tensioners -A rear impact may deploy active head restraints and use the seat back hinge to absorb the force from the collision -A rear/side impact may deploy side and curtain airbags -Note: It is important to remember every vehicle is designed differently and may or may not deploy the restraint systems as described -Side Airbags and Curtain Airbags – many vehicles have side airbags to offer extra protection in side impact collisions. A side airbag may be located in the seat backs, in the door trim panels, or along the roof rails from the A-pillar to the rear pillar. Airbags located along the roof rails are typically referred to as curtain airbags -Seat Side Airbags – side airbags may be located on the exterior-facing side of the seat back. They may be e quipped in the front seats only or both front and rear seats. After deployment, the vehicle maker may require replacement of the seat frame or complete seat back assembly, the foam padding, or damaged seat covers. Damaged seat covers should not be repaired. Seat covers that split during airbag deployment should not be re-sewn. Special thread is used that allows the seam to split and the airbag to properly deploy. The vehicle maker may only require replacement of the airbag module if the module has a built-in cover -Side Curtain Airbags – side curtain airbags are located along the roof rails. They typically extend from the A-pillar to the C- or D-pillar. Some larger vehicles may have multiple curtains on both sides to provide protection for both the front and rear occupants -Dual Stage Airbags – many vehicles today are equipped with dual stage airbags. Identify these airbags using vehicle-specific information or by physically examining the airbag -Activation – the function of a dual stage airbag is to deploy at a reduced force compared to a single stage airbag. It requires two separate ignitors and wire harness connectors. This allows the restraint system ECM to deploy whichever inflator is required depending on the crash parameters. Depending on the vehicle makers design and programmed crash parameters dual stage airbags may activate either as a single, reduced-charge deployment, or from different igniters simultaneously or staggered -Personal Safety – dual stage airbags look similar to single stage airbags when viewed from the front. When approaching a vehicle with deployed airbags, treat the airbags as dual stage airbags, with an active charge and still able to deploy. Identifying dual stage airbags can be done by referencing vehicle maker service information and looking for two igniter connectors on the backside of the airbag module. Note: Dual-stage airbags may still have a charge and may deploy. Use extreme caution Impact and Safing Sensors -Impact Sensors- restraint system sensors should include front, side, and safing or arming sensors. These sensors monitor vehicle conditions to detect sudden deceleration in a collision. The sensor then sends a signal to the restraint control module (RCM) to determine if an airbag should be deployed -Front Impact Sensors – front impact sensors detect front collisions and are located on the front portion of the vehicle. Front impact sensor locations may include: -On the front lower rails -On the radiator core support -Behind the headlamps -On the front frame rail crossmember -Side Impact Sensors – side impact sensors, located on both sides of the vehicle, are designed to detect side impact, and may be mounted: -In doors -On B- and C-pillars -Behind or under seats -On the rear wheelhouse -Note: Some vehicles use a pressure-based side impact sensor, located in the doors. These types of sensors are designed to detect a quick increase of pressure inside the door cavity during a side impact. These types of side impact sensors have a faster response time, but require other impact sensors located in other areas in case the door is not impacted during a collision -Safing or Arming Sensor – a safing or arming sensor is a secondary sensor that must close with the front or side impact sensors to confirm that a collision is taking place. This is done to prevent an accidental deployment caused by a problem in the front impact sensor circuits. Safing or arming sensors may be located inside the RCM or as a separate sensor in the passenger compartment. Some systems use three separate sensors to determine airbag deployment -Impact Sensor Operation – impact sensors detect sudden deceleration, or velocity change, at or near the point of impact. These sensors are typically solid state, with no moving parts, and send information to the RCM. The RCM calculates the information from the impact sensor and other sensors and uses that information to determine which, if any, restraint systems should be deployed. To protect passengers from injury from an unnecessary deployment, restraint systems are programmed with specific parameters. Airbags, and other types of restraint systems, may not deploy if the required parameters are not met Restraints Control Module -Restraint Control Module (RCM) – the RCM can be considered the brains behind the SRS. Functions of the RCM may include: -Deploying restraints -Checking for system faults -Processing information from various input sources -Storing information from the collision -Storing energy to deploy restraints if battery power is lost during a collision -Deploying Restraints – deployment of the restraints may be based on the perceived severity of the collision, deceleration rate, seat belt use, occupant position, and passenger occupant weight. Following deployment, the RCM may also communicate with the body control module (BCM) to turn on the interior lights and unlock the doors. The RCM may also initiate a call to 911 through systems like OnStar. Note: The RCM uses capacitors to store enough energy to deploy restraints if the battery power is lost during a collision -Checking for System Faults – most RCMs perform a self-diagnostic test when the ignition key is turned on. If the RCM is not working properly, or if it detects a problem with the restraint system, the airbag warning lamp will illuminate and remain lit until the problem is corrected. An airbag warning lamp that does not illuminate during the initial bulb check sequence may also indicate a problem -Processing Information – the RCM is designed to process information from various input sources. Input sources may include impact sensors, seat belt use sensors, the brake pedal switch, vehicle speed sensors, seat position sensors, and information from other control modules such as the occupant classification system (OCS) for the front passenger seat. Note: The RCM also stores data from the collision. This information includes the number of previous deployments and for which systems -RCM Mounting Locations – RCM mounting locations may include, but are not limited to: -Under the lower center portion of the instrument panel -Under the center console, between the front seats -Under a seat -Behind a kick panel -Note: It is important to refer to vehicle-specific service information to properly locate and identify the RCM Driver SRS -Front Driver Airbag System – the front driver airbag system includes the airbag module and the clock or coil spring. The airbag module contains the airbag inflator, electrical connectors, and trim cover. The clock or coil spring is mounted behind the steering wheel and is designed to provide a continuous electrical connection for the front driver airbag module while the steering wheel is being turned. Other names for the clock or coil spring include supplemental inflatable restraints (SIR) coil, cable reel, spiral cable, sliding contact, or slip ring. -Collapsible Steering Column – an energy absorbing, or collapsible, steering column is designed to collapse during a collision to reduce driver injury -Upper Column – steering columns may be designed to collapse in the upper column. Some upper columns have two shafts that are designed to function similary to a telescope during a collision. This type of design uses a solid shaft that compresses into a hollow shaft to shorten the overall length of the steering column. The shafts may be locked with plastic inserts that shear off upon impact. Upper steering columns may also be designed with a steel mesh or accordion-like convolutions that collapse under collision forces -Lower Steering Sections – the steering column may also be designed to collapse in the lower steering sections. These sections may be linked by offset universal joints to allow the sections to fold during an impact. This keeps the lower steering column from entering the passenger compartment -Mounting Brackets – the steering column may be designed to collapse at the steering column mounting brackets. Some steering columns are designed to collapse at the bracket that holds the column to the instrument panel frame. This may also be done with plastic inserts that shear upon impact. Note: Some columns may use a pyrotechnic charge to deploy the collapsible steering column -Knee Bolster and Knee Bolster Airbags – the knee bolster is designed into the lower portion of the instrument panel. It may provide an extra cushioned area to protect the knees and prevent sliding under the instrument panel during a collision. Vehicles may alternatively be equipped with knee bolster airbags, which inflate, pressing the occupants knees back against the lower part of the seat. This keeps the occupant safely in place. They are designed to deploy with the front airbags and may only be located on the driver side, or on both the driver and passenger sides of the vehicle Passenger SRS -Front Passenger Airbag – passenger airbag modules may be located on the passenger side of the instrument panel, facing the passenger seat. They may also be mounted on top of the instrument panel and use the windshield to deflect the deployment in the proper direction toward the passenger. Some older model vehicles are equipped with a disable switch that allows the driver to turn the passenger airbag off and on. Vehicles equipped with an occupant classification system (OCS) may also disable the passenger airbag when the seat is not occupied or the passenger does not meet the specified weight. -Occupant Classification System – the OCS is used to determine if the front passenger restraints should be activated. The OCS uses many sensors and a control module to provide information directly to the RCM, which controls the SRS -OCS Weight Sensors – various methods are used to determine front passenger occupant weight for the OCS, including a silicone-filled pressure bladder, a sensor mat, or strain gauges. Always refer to the vehicle maker service information to determine the type of system, mandatory replacement items, and calibration requirements before repairing any OCS. An OCS may also use various other sensors. These include the: -Seat belt-use sensor to determine if the seat belt is in use -Seat-position sensor to determine how close the occupant is to the airbag -Status lamp on the instrument panel or rearview mirror to communicate the status of the passenger airbag -OCS Control Module – an OCS will typically include a separate control module that communicates with the RCM. It may be located under the front passenger seat or under the center console -Instrument Panel Frame – passenger airbags are attached to the instrument panel and frame on the passenger side of the vehicle. Instrument panel frames are attached from the A-pillar to A-pillar. It is also used as a mounting point for the instrument panel and steering column. Some makers refer to these frames as instrument panel reinforcements, a cross-car beam, or a crossmember Safety Data Sheets and Labels (1/2) Safety Data Sheets Hazardous Material Regulations -Hazardous Material Regulations – the high cost of medical care for employees led to different types of awareness programs and government mandates to protect employees from hazardous materials and unsafe work practices. In the United States, this program is known as the Right-To-Know Law and is administered by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OHSA). Note: For additional information on government safety and environmental regulations, visit www.osha.gov/dsg/hazcom/ and ccar-greenlink.org -Facilities Must Be Compliant – it is each facilities responsibility to be compliant with hazardous materials laws. As such, employees must be aware of the hazardous materials stored within the facility. According to OSHA, the number one safety and health violation for collision repair facilities is failure to communicate hazards within the work place to employees. Proper hazard communication, such as the sign in the image, is vital to worker health, and safety. -Compliant Checklist – the compliant checklist is: -A compilation of occupational safety and environmental laws -Is not a comprehensive list -Note: An OSHA inspector will use a similar checklist when inspecting a shop Safety Data Sheet (SDS) Layout -SDS Detailed Information – a Safety Data Sheet (SDS) must accompany every hazardous material in a workplace for professional use, and be readily accessible to workers when they are in their work areas. A typical safety data sheet will include hazard information for: -Handling -Storing -Disposing, and -Using material -Note: Employees are allowed to add information on hazards relating to the specific workplace, but cannot reduce the number of sections -SDS Sections – a supplier-provided SDS is divided into 16 sections. All workplace safety data sheets can be combined into a binder for ease of use. -Section 1: Product Identification – this section identifies: -Product identifier or common name -Product maker contact information, and -Recommended use of the material -Note: An SDS must be updated when the emergency telephone number or other product maker identifiers change -Section 2: Hazards Identification – this section identifies: -Hazard classification of the material, for example, flammable liquid -Hazard symbols which are pictorial representations of the particular hazard, such as a flame for a flammable material -Signal word, either warning or danger -Hazard statements, for example, may cause liver and kidney damage or highly flammable liquid and vapor, and -Relevant precautionary statements -Section 3: Composition / Information on Ingredients – this section identifies: -Ingredients contained in the materials -Impurities -Stabilizing additives -Chemical names, and -Concentration percentages -Section 4: First Aid Measures – this section describes: -Care to be given by untrained responders -First aid instructions -Descriptions of important symptoms or effects, and -Recommendations for immediate medical care -Section 5: Firefighting Measures – this section provides instructions for fighting a fire involving the material including: -The appropriate fire extinguisher -Hazards that develop from the material during a fire, and -Special protective equipment, or precautions for firefighters -Using the Proper Extinguisher – extinguishers are designated by class, and section 5 displays the proper use according to class designation -Class A – ordinary combustible materials, such as paper and wood -Extinguishers use water -Class B – flammable liquids, such as gasoline, oil and solvents -Extinguishers use carbon dioxide or dry chemical -Class C – energized electrical equipment, such as batteries and electrical wiring -Extinguishers use carbon dioxide, and -Class D – combustible metals, such as magnesium -Note: A class A-B-C fire is most common in a collision repair facility, and they should have several A-B-C extinguishers throughout the facility -Per letter – -A = for wood, paper, cloth, trash and other ordinary material -B = for gasoline, grease, oil, paint and other flammable liquids -C = for live electrical equipment -D = for combustible metals -Class ABC at the bottom – the 3 blue squares -Fire and Explosion Terms – some terms used when describing fire and explosion materials are: -Flammable materials -Combustible metals -Flashpoint -Auto-ignition temperature -Upper- and lower-flammable limits -Flammable Material – flammable materials can easily catch fire and burn rapidly or explosively -Combustible Materials – combustible materials can burn, but do not catch fire as easily as flammables -Flashpoint – flashpoint is the lower temperature at which a mixture of a liquid’s vapor and oxygen can catch fire near a source of ignition, such as a flame or spark. The lower the flashpoint the greater the hazard. Flammables have a flashpoint below 100 degrees Fahrenheit, and combustibles have a flashpoint at or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit -Auto-Ignition Temperature – this is the lowest temperature a vapor or gas will ignite without a flame or spark being present -Upper- and Lower-Flammable/Explosive Limits – upper- and lower-flammable/explosive limits. These limits are the amount of a material’s vapor in the air that will catch fire with a flame or spark. Above the upper flammable limit, the mixture is too rich to burn. Below the lower flammable limit, the mixture is too lean. These limits also indicate proper ventilation requirements when using a material -SDS Sections continued – now let us continue our look at the sections of SDS. -Section 6 – Accidental Release Measure – this section provides the appropriate response to spills, leaks, or releases, including containment and cleanup practices, and circumstances distinguishing between large and small spills. Section 6 also provides additional information on: -Use of personal precautions -Emergency procedures, including instructions for evacuations, consulting experts, and appropriate protective clothing used during cleanup -Methods and materials used for containment -Cleanup procedures including appropriate techniques for neutralization, decontamination, and cleaning or vacuuming using absorbent materials -Section 7: Handling and Storage – this section provides guidance on safe handling practices including: -Handling incompatible materials -Minimizing the release of materials into the environment -Providing advice on general hygiene practices such as precautions on not eating, drinking, and smoking in work areas -Conditions for safe storage -Section 8: Exposure Controls / Personal Protection – this section indicates: -Exposure limits which are the maximum concentrations of each chemical in the material a worker can be exposed to in a given time -Appropriate engineering controls such as type of exhaust ventilation that can be used to minimize worker exposure -Personal protective measures to prevent illness or injury from exposure to chemicals -Special requirements for protective clothing -Section 8 also uses several acronyms to describe levels of exposure -PEL (Permissible Exposure Limits) are the legal limits for exposure of an employee to a chemical substance or physical agent. Usually expressed in parts per million (PPM) or in milligrams per cubic meter (mg/m3) -TLV (Threshold Limit Value) - is the airborne concentration of a chemical to which all workers may be repeatedly exposed, day after day, over a working lifetime, without adverse health effects -STEL (Short-Term Exposure Limit) is the concentration of the material that workers can be exposed to continuously for a short period of time without suffering ill effects -TWA (Time-Weighted Average) – is the concentration for an 8-hour workday and a 40-hour work week to which it is believed that nearly all workers may be repeatedly exposed, day after day, for a working lifetime without adverse effect -C (Ceiling) is the concentration of the chemical that should never be exceeded during any exposure -Note: Not all respirators provide protection in all situations -Section 9: Physical and Chemical Properties – section 9, physical and chemical properties, identifies what the material looks and smells like in its natural state, and include: -Properties of material in existing state -Material color -Material smell -Other physical properties, as appropriate -Section 10: Stability and Reactivity – this section describes the reactivity hazards and stability of the material which includes: -Reactivity, which is how reactive the material is and to what other materials -Material Stability, which is how stable the material is under normal ambient temperature, while in storage, and when being handled -Conditions to be avoided -Known or anticipated hazardous decomposition products that could be produced because of use, storage, or heating -Section 11: Toxicological Information – this section identifies toxicological and health effect information (or indicates that the data is not available) which includes: -Likely routes of exposure, be it inhalation, ingestion, skin or eye contact -Effects from short- and long-term exposure -Toxicity levels -Symptoms after the exposure -Whether the material can cause cancer -SDS Sections 12-16 – there are five remaining sections in the SDS. Sections 12-15 are non-mandatory, though there must be placeholders for them. -Section 12: Ecological Information – this section details the environmental impact of the material if released to the environment. Information may include -Data from toxicity tests performed on aquatic and/or terrestrial organisms -Whether there is potential for the chemical to persist and degrade in the environment -Potential for a substance to move from the soil to groundwater -Other adverse effects -Section 13: Disposal Considerations – this section provides instructions on proper disposal practices, recycling, or reclamation of the material or its container, and safe handling practices to minimize exposure. Information may include: -Appropriate disposal containers -Appropriate disposal methods -Description of physical and chemical properties that may affect disposal -Language discouraging sewage disposal -Special precautions for landfills, or incineration activities -Section 14: Transport Information (Non-mandatory) – this section provides guidance on classification information for shipping and transporting of the chemicals contained in the material by: -Road -Air -Rail -Sea -Section 15: Regulatory Information (Non-mandatory) – this section identifies safety, health, and environmental regulations specific for the material, not found anywhere else on the SDS -Section 16: Other Information – this last section indicates the Date SDS was prepared, or the last known revision date Safety Data Sheets and Labels (2/2) Labels Label Indicators -Label Types – there are three types of labels commonly used for identifying hazardous materials. These labels include: -Supplier -Workplace (Such as in the image shown), and -Other means of identification -Note: None of these labels may replace the SDS -Supplier Label Requirements – all hazardous chemicals shipped after June 1, 2015, must be labeled with specific elements including: -Pictograms -Signal words -Hazard statements -Precautionary statements -Labels must be in English -Note: If there is a container without a label, do not handle it until you found out from the repair facility manager what the material is. Once you have determined what the product is, place a label on the container -Supplier Label Information – each container of hazardous material must be labeled, tagged, or marked. -Product Identifier – the product identifier displays: -Product name -Code number or batch number -Note: The manufacturer, importer or distributer decides the appropriate product identifier. The same product identifier must be both on the label and in section 1 of the SDS -Supplier Identification – the supplier identification displays: -Chemical manufacturer, importer or other responsible party -Name -Address -Emergency telephone number -Precautionary Statements – precautionary statements identify the recommended measures to prevent adverse effects from exposure to the hazardous material, including: -Prevention, for example, wear nitrile gloves when using this product -Response, for example, in case of fire use a dry chemical or carbon dioxide extinguisher -Storage, for example, store in a cool well-ventilated place that is locked -Disposal, which will refer to regulations -Hazard Pictograms – hazard pictograms are graphic symbols used to communicate specific information about the hazards of a material. They have a red square frame set at a point with a black hazard symbol on a white background, and are wide to be clearly visible -Label Indicators – -Flame – the flame symbol denotes: -Flammable -Is not used for combustibles -Skull and Crossbones – the skull and crossbones indicates that the material may be toxic or fatal is: -Swallowed -Touched to skin -Inhaled -Gas Cylinder – this symbol means that the substance is compressed, liquefied, or dissolved gas under pressure at 29 pounds per square inch or more -Health Hazard – the health hazard symbol appears on materials with varied levels of health hazards within specific categories such as: -Carcinogen, which is a chemical substance or a mixture of chemical substances which induce cancer or increase its incidence -Reproductive Toxicity, which includes adverse effects on sexual function and fertility in adult males and females, as well as developmental toxicity in offspring -Respiratory Sensitizer, which is a substance that induces hypersensitivity of the airways following inhalation -Target Organ Toxicity that may cause damage to bodily organs -Aspiration Toxicity, which includes severe effects such as chemical pneumonia, varying degrees of pulmonary injury, or death following aspiration -Corrosion – the corrosion symbol denotes chemicals or materials that have corrosive properties whose effects include: -Severe skin burns -Severe or serious eye damage -Corrosion to metals -Exclamation Mark – the exclamation mark appears on materials to indicate less severe toxicity than material identified by the skull and crossbones. It can mean harmful if: -Swallowed -Inhaled -Contacts skin -Note: Effects include irritants to the skin, eye and respiratory tract, an allergic response following skin contact, narcotic effects such as drowsiness, lack of coordination, and dizziness may appear -Exploding Bomb – the exploding bomb pictogram appears on the materials that are explosive or self-reactive, in which heating may cause fire or an explosion without the need for air. Another property this symbol represents is for organic peroxide. Most undiluted organic peroxides can catch fire easily and burn very rapidly and intensely. An example of an organic peroxide in the repair facility is methyl ethyl ketone peroxide. It is used in the manufacture of fiberglass reinforced plastics as a hardening agent -Environment (Non-Mandatory) – the environment pictogram is non-mandatory and appears on materials that indicate levels of aquatic toxicity -Flame Over Circle – the flame over circle symbol appears on chemicals or materials that are oxidizers, which: -Increase the concentration of oxygen -Can cause or contribute to the combustion of liquids and solids -Label Indicators Continued – in addition to pictograms, labels contain other indicators as well. -Signal Word – a signal word indicates the relative level of severity of the hazard, and a potential hazard. There are only two words used as signal words: -Danger, for the more severe hazards -Warning, for the less severe hazards -Note: There is only one signal word on the label no matter how many hazards a material may have -Hazard Statements – hazard statements describe the nature of the hazard(s) of a material, including, where appropriate, the degree of hazard. All of the applicable hazard statements must appear on the label -Supplemental Information – supplemental information is additional information the label producer deems helpful -Personal Protection Symbols – -Personal protection symbols: -Indicate what personal protection is required when working with a material -Can be read in any language -The symbols shown are common in a repair facility and represent: -Eye protection -Face shield -Full-body protection -Gloves -Air-purifying respirator -Supplied-air respirator -Apron -Foot protection Label Types -Inner and Outer Containers – the supplier does not have to label an outer container if the inner container label can be seen and read through the outer container -Workplace Label Requirements – labels created and attached to containers in the workplace are not required to have as much information as a supplier label, and workplace label information can be acquired from the original supplier label or the product SDS. A workplace label must contain: -The product name, as stated on the SDS -Hazardous warning information -Note: The hazard information can be found in section 2 of the SDS -When Workplace Labels are Required – workplace labels are required when: -The supplier label is removed or defaced -Identifying a solution, for example, when a product is mixed or diluted and kept for further use -Transferring to a small container, for example, when contents of one container are transferred to another unlabeled container -Mixing paint, such as when pouring mixed paint into a container that will be stored -Note: Workplace labels are NOT required when material is used in one shift, by one person. Water bottles should also be clearly labeled to ensure water is not confused with other clear liquids -NFPA Label – the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) has a label system for use by emergency personnel. The codes on the label are shown in different colored boxes according to the hazard represented. The boxes are always in the same position in the diamond. -Fire Hazard is red and is always on top -Instability Hazard is yellow and is always on the right -Health Hazard is blue and is always on the left -Special Hazards is white or blank and is always on the bottom. This designates hazards such as “acidic”, “radioactive”, or “not to be used with water” -NFPA Number Codes – -The NFPA uses a number code, 0-4, to signify the danger level. The higher the number, the higher the danger level - 0 – very low danger -1 – slightly dangerous -2 – moderately dangerous - 3 – seriously dangerous - 4- severely dangerous -In the lower portion of the symbol shown, special hazards are identified. There are currently only two NFPA approved symbols -“OX” which denotes that a material is an oxidizer -“W” with a line through it to denote unusual reactivity with water -HazCom 2012 Number Codes – - HazCom 2012 is OSHA’s number classification system which classifies hazards to determine what label information is required. There are four numbers or categories, 1 through 4 -1 is most severe hazard -4 is least severe hazard -The Hazard category numbers: -Are NOT required to be on labels -ARE required on SDS’s in section 2 -Other Means of Identification – -The last type of labe is “Other means of idenfitication”. This type of label is required for containers where the original label may be hidden or covered. Examples include: -Paint cleaning systems where solvents or residues may damage or cover a label -Large storage containers where labels may be hidden from view -Secondary containers where solvents commonly wash off the label printing -“Other means of identification” labels may be anything that indicates what the product is. These labels must still include basic requirements of a workplace label, and be identified in an employee education program so that everyone is informed about the meanings of any codes, colors, or signs Safety Shield Technologies Nissan presents -Advancements in Safety Technology- Need for: -Monitoring driver, road conditions, and adjacent traffic -Decreasing the response time for braking / emergency situations -Increasing passenger protection in the event of a collision -Nissan responds by creating Safety Shield Technologies. Nissan created Safety Shield technologies to assist drivers while driving by helping avoid collisions and to help protect vehicle occupants when collisions are unavoidable -The Nissan Safety Shield Technologies – monitor, respond, and protect are the three components to Nissan’s Safety Shield Technologies -Collision Repairs and Safety Shield Technologies – -Vehicles must be properly aligned – both structure and suspension -Sensor / camera mounts must be dimensionally correct -Collision Repairs and Safety Shield Technologies (cont’d) – -Body filler can affect sensor operation -Paint thickness can affect sensor operation -Intelligent Cruise Control (ICC) Operation – -ICC sensor reflects radar off vehicle ahead -Determines speed and distance of vehicle ahead -ICC sensor sends information to ADAS control unit -Allows vehicle speed to be reduced or increased -System is turned ON and OFF using switch on steering wheel -Detection range of sensor will not detect all objects -Note: The Intelligent Cruise Control system maintains a set distance from the vehicle ahead -Identifying Vehicles with ICC- -Determine if vehicle is equipped with ICC -2016 Nissan Sentra, Altima, Maxima, Murano, Armada and most 2016 Infiniti models -Look for ON / Off switch on steering wheel -Dash icon (if power available to vehicle) -Note: The activation switch on the steering wheel, which is often shown with a vehicle icon and three lines, indicates the ICC option -ICC System Parts – -Driver Assistance Buzzer -Engine Control Module -Body Control Module -ICC Sensor -ICC Steering Switch -Steering Angle Sensor -ADAS Control Unit -ABS Actuator -ICC System Damage Analysis – -ICC sensor prone to damage -Check for cracks to sensor case or other signs of damage -Repair / replace decisions based on extent of damage and Nissan Recommendations -Plastic repair can hinder sensor performance -Do not paint the sensor -Note: Damage to the front of the vehicle may disable the ICC system -ICC Sensor – the damaged ICC sensor will affect other systems: -Forward Emergency Braking -Distance Control Assist -Predictive Forward Collision Warning -Position Statement for Radar Calibration – The Nissan and Infiniti position statement for the ICC sensor recommends calibrating the sensor any time work is done on or around the sensor -ICC Testing Following Part Replacement – -Perform road tests following ICC service -Look for normal operation in different road conditions -Note: Road tests should be done after working on the ICC system -Predictive Forward Collision Warning Operation – -Uses the ICC sensor to calculate the distance from the vehicle in front of the vehicle ahead and relative speed -If there is an issue with the closing speed, the ADAS control unit sends a signal to the driver assistance buzzer control module to alert the driver -Designated to operate at speeds at or above 3 mph -Identifying Vehicles with PFCW – -Option on the 2016 Nissan Rogue, Altima, Maxima, Murano, and Armada -Option on all 2016 Infiniti vehicles -Look for an indicator on the dash or in the menu system in the instrument cluster -ICC sensor on the front of the vehicle -PFCW Operation Considerations – -Understand when the system is and is not expected to function -Even though there are no mechanical problems, the PFCW system may not operate when there is a narrow vehicle ahead -System may not work in snow or heavy rain, or if the sensor is covered by: -Dirt -Ice -Snow -PFCW may not work driving in a tunnel, driving on a steep downhill slope or sharp curves, or if the distance to the vehicle ahead is too close -Note: Heavy rain can prevent the PFCW system from working properly -Parts that Make up the PFCW – -Display Control Unit -Driver Assistance Buzzer -ICC Sensor -Combination Meter -ADAS Control Unit -ABS Actuator -PFCW Damage Analysis – -System malfunction indicator lamp -High-pitched tone -Forward Emergency Brake (FEB) warning lamp illuminates -PFCW system has a malfunction -ICC sensor is covered or obstructed -Note: The forward emergency brake lamp, which is integral to the PFCW system, will light when the system is off -Identifying Vehicles with LDW / LDP – -Many of the 2016 Infiniti vehicles, and the 2016 Nissan Armada -Look for the ON / OFF control -Look for camera next to rearview mirror -Note: These are examples of what can be used to help identify vehicles with lane departure warning or related systems such as lane keep assist -LDW / LDP System Operation - -When the LDW system is turned ON, the advanced driver assist control module sends an “ON” signal to the chassis control module -Lane camera looks at the lane markers and evaluates the position of the car, sends information to the chassis control module or ADAS depending on vehicle design -Control module determines if a correction should be made and sends info to computers that will make adjustments -Moving vehicle back to center of lane done through braking or steering control depending on vehicle module -Note: the LDW system can be toggled ON and OFF using the information display. -Active Lane Control System Operation- -Helps prevent vehicle wander due to crosswinds or uneven pavement -Helps keep the vehicle in the lane with fewer corrections needed by the driver -Uses many of the same parts as the LDP system -Parts of a LDW System – -Lane Camera Unit -Driver Assistance Buzzer -Body Control Module -Display Control Unit -Combination Meter -ADAS Control Unit -ABS Actuator -LDW/LDP System Damage Analysis – -Check all LDW parts for obvious physical damage -Look for the presence of a malfunction indicator lamp or any trouble codes -Verify that the glass in front of the camera is clean and undamaged and that the vehicle is at the proper ride height -Note that stone chips in the windshield should not be repaired in front of the camera -Windshield and glass position statement -Note: The area in front of the camera should be free of chips, cracks, or debris for proper operation -Lane Departure Camera Calibration- -Required when camera removed or new one installed -Requires printing and sizing targets from service info -Requires attaching targets to a white board -Consult scan tool is used to run calibration -Use of Aftermarket Glass – no bueno -Identifying Vehicles with Blind Spot Warning – -Blind spot warning systems are standard or an option on most INFINITI and Nissan vehicles -Look for the blind spot symbol or indicator light on the door mirrors on door -Note: The indicator lamp on the interior of the door turns on when a vehicle is in a blind spot location -Blind Spot Warning System Operation – -Uses two radar sensors, one on each side of the vehicle, behind each end of the rear bumper -Detection zone is from door mirror to about 10 ft behind rear bumper cover -May steer vehicle back into lane (depending on vehicle option), called blind spot intervention -Will not operate under specific conditions -Designed to operate above 37 mph -Note: This shows the blind spot detection zone, which extends behind the rear bumper and sideways -Parts of a Blind Spot Warning System – -Blind Spot Warning Indicator -BCM -ABS Actuator -Transmission Control Module -Combination Meter -Warning Buzzer -Side Radar -ADAS Control Unit -Blind Spot Warning Damage Analysis- -A damaged radar sensor displays a warning on the information display -Buzzer will sound indicating if sensor is blocked -Look for damage to the left or right side of the rear bumper cover or lower quarter panel area -During repairs, make sure the sensor is mounted correctly and at specification -Make sure that any body repairs do not affect sensor performance -Note: damage to the lower quarter panel or outer bumper cover are potential indicators of radar sensor damage -Rear Cross-Traffic Alert and Parking Sonars – -Rear cross-traffic alert and parking sonars are used in combination to help alert the driver to cross traffic -Rear cross-traffic alert uses the blind spot detection sensor and the four sonar sensors in the rear bumper -Designed to operate at speeds below 5 mph and whenever the vehicle is in reverse -Note: Parking sonars, positioned across the rear bumper, are used to detect objects behind the vehicle -Backup Collision Intervention (BCI)- -System will alert the driver AND brake vehicle to avoid collision -The system is turned ON by selecting the BCI switch -System can be disabled by material covering radar sensor -Never apply two coats of primer to sensor mounting part -If the sonar control module is replaced, it requires configuring to the vehicle using Consult -Note: The BCI provides a rear view of the vehicle when the system is engaged -System Operation for Around View Monitor – -Uses four cameras to create a 360 degree view of vehicle’s surroundings -Can help maneuver in tight spots -Operated on center console -System Parts for Around View Monitor- -Door Mirror RH -Around View Monitor Control Unit -Front Camera -Door Mirror LH -Rear View Camera -AV Control Unit -Around View Monitor Damage Analysis- -Camera mount areas are prone to collision damage, so camera replacement is common -Engage the system to verify it works -Make sure the cameras are properly aligned so the image displays properly -Around View Monitor Camera Calibration – -Calibration required if any camera or camera mounting part has been replaced -Calibration required if around view monitor control unit is removed and installed, or replaced -Calibration is done using a Nissan Consult scan tool -Boundary of each camera image is aligned with lines that have been placed on the shop floor -Identifying Vehicles with Forward Emergency Braking – -Option found on the 2016 Nissan Sentra, Altima, Maxima, Rogue, Murano, and Armada -Option found on the 2016 INFINITI Q50, Q70, QX30, QX60, and QX80 -Look for presence of a camera by the rearview mirror and the ICC sensor -Forward Emergency Braking Operation – -System measures the distance from a vehicle ahead using the ICC sensor in the front bumper -ICC sensor sends data to the ADAS control unit, which determines the possibility of a collision -Using data received, the ADAS control unit does several operations based on the possibility of a collision -The systems can be turned ON or OFF by navigating menus in the information display -Note: the braking system monitors speed two vehicles ahead -Parts of the Forward Emergency Braking System – -Driver Assistance Buzzer -Engine Control Module -ICC Brake Hold Relay -Transmission Control Module -ICC Sensor -Display Control Unit -Combination Meter -ADAS Control Unit -Brake Pedal Position Switch -ABS Actuator -Accelerator Pedal Actuator -Forward Emergency Braking Damage Analysis – -Important to know when the system is malfunction and when certain road or driving conditions can affect system operation -Dirty sensor will cancel system and a beep will sound along with an indicator lamp showing the system is OFF -System cancelled if there is a mechanical issue that prevents system operation -Note: The FEB warning light will turn on to inform the driver that the system is OFF -Forward Emergency Braking Diagnostics and Calibrations- -Note that the FEB system shares parts and diagnostic procedures with the ICC system -As with all Safety Shield Technologies, verify that the system is operation normally -When the intelligent brake assist OFF indicator lamp stays on and SHOULD be off, perform diagnostics -Note: Systems diagnostics are performed using the Consult scan tool -System Overlap- -Lane Camera Unit- -Predictive Forward Collision Warning- -Predictive Forward Collision Warning -Driver Attention Alert -Lane Departure Warning -Active Lane Control -Intelligent Cruise Control (ICC) Sensor- -Forward Emergency Braking -Intelligent Cruise Control -Predictive Forward Collision Warning -ABS Actuator – -Forward Emergency Braking -Blind Spot Warning Intervention System -Predictive Forward Collision Warning -Lane Departure Prevention -Intelligent Cruise Control -Cameras- -Around View -Moving Object Detection -ADAS Control Unit- -Intelligent Cruise Control -Lane Departure Warning -Blind Spot Warning -Predictive Forward Collision Warning -Forward Emergency Braking -Systems that Require Calibration- -Safety Shield Technologies have several parts that must be re-calibrated or initialized if a part of the system is removed or replaced -ICC sensor -ICC control unit -Lane camera -Around view camera -Module summary- students should not be able to identify the operation and parts that make up the: -Intelligent Cruise Control -Predictive Forward Collision Warning System -Lane Departure Warning/Lane Departure Prevention/Active Lane Control -Blind Spot Warning and Rear Cross-Traffic Alert -Rearview Monitor and Around View Monitor -Forward Emergency Braking (Intelligent Brake Assist (IBA)) -Learning Objectives – At the end of this module, students are expected to: -Explain Nissan’s restraint systems -Inspect the airbag system parts for damage following a collision -Determine damage to the occupant classification system -Explain active head restraint operation and verify the system still functions following a collision -Determine if seat belt pre-tensioners deployed and explain replacement procedures -Supplemental Restraint Systems Overview – -Restraint systems provide additional protection inside the high-strength body zone cone construction -Front, seat, knee, and roof-mounted airbags -Occupant classification sensor and seat belt pre-tensioners -Note: Multiple airbag systems are situated throughout the passenger compartment -Restraint Systems Operation- -Nissan advanced airbag systems include dual-stage supplemental front airbags with seat belt sensor and an OCS -The inflation rate of the dual-stage airbags adjust based on crash severity and seat belt usage -Airbags are used with seat belt pre-tensioners to properly position occupant -Tensioner will deploy but the airbag will not depending on collision severity -Note: Multiple airbags located throughout the cabin are deployed by front and side sensors -Restraint Systems Parts- -Driver Airbag Module -Passenger Airbag Module -OCS Control Unit -Crash Sensor -Airbag Diagnosis Sensor Unit -LH Side Curtain Airbag Module -Rear Side Airbag Satellite Sensor LH -Front Side Airbag Module LH -Front Side Airbag Sensor -Front Door Satellite Sensor LH -Common Diagnostics- -SRS Airbag Warning Light Stays On- -Check deployment of airbag module and seat belt pre-tensioner -Check airbag fuse -Check harness connector -Check wiring harness externals -SRS Airbag Warning Light Does Not Turn On- -Check combination meter power supply and ground -Check harness connector -Check wiring harness -Check airbag diagnosis sensor unit -OCS Removal and Installation Considerations – -Disable the restraint system when replacing the OCS -Nissan’s standard is to disconnect and isolate both battery terminals and wait at least 3 minutes -The control unit and seat sensor mat are an integral part of the front passenger seat cushion -Replaced as an assembly -OCS must go through a zero point reset -Process is provided in the vehicle service information -Note: The indicator lamp illuminates when the passenger airbag is turned off -Pop-Up Roll Bars – -Deployment requires replacement of the pop-up roll bar assembly and covers -If NOT deployed, check for visible signs of damage -Also check the harness and connectors for damage -Check for visible signs of damage to the seatback support brace assembly -Active Head Restraint – -Designed to be reused following a collision -Pivot-type system that pushes the head restraint forward when the occupant’s back puts pressure on the seatback assembly -There are no repair recommendations, the seatback must be replaced as an assembly -Note: The head restraint is designed to reset following a rear collision -Seat Belt Pre-Tensioners – -Seat belt pretensioners are activated by signals from the airbag sensor -All seat belt assemblies in use during a collision are replaced unless the collision was minor, belts show no damage, continue to operate properly -Inspect all seat belt assemblies, including retractors and attached hardware after any collision -All seat belt pre-tensioners must be replaced even if the seat belts were not in use during a collision in which the airbags are deployed -No calibration is necessary following replacement of passive restraint system parts, but verify any diagnostic trouble codes that may be present -Latch System – -Nissan’s LATCH, or Lower Anchors and Tethers for Children, system is compatible with child restraint seats -Following a collision where the LATCH system was in use, check the anchoring locations for any damage -Note: The LATCH system is designed to work with child seats -Module Summary – students should now be able to: -Explain Nissan’s restraints systems -Inspect the airbag system parts for damage following a collision -Determine damage to the occupant classification system -Explain active head restraint operation and verify operation -Determine if seat belt pre-tensioners have deployed and explain replacement recommendations -Expenses when scheduling the repair appointment. Bringing the vehicle in on a Tuesday will allow enough time in the work week to complete the repairs without adding two days of weekend rental expenses for our insurance partner or customer. -Temporary Repairs – what happens when your production shop is at capacity, but there are more repairs to be scheduled? Does the vehicle need to be repaired now or can it be made drivable so it can be scheduled in when it will fit into your production schedule? The practice of performing temporary or minor repairs to make the vehicle drivable until you have capacity to bring the vehicle in for repairs may be an uncommon practice in your shop, but it may be a viable option in some instances. Note: When deciding if a vehicle is a good candidate for temporary repairs, always consider all safety and mechanical systems to ensure the vehicle will be safe to drive without doing any additional damage to the vehicle. -Not Appropriate for Temporary Repairs – when doing temporary repairs, all safety and mechanical items should be considered. If an airbag has deployed, the vehicle should not be driven until it has been replaced and the system is working properly. -Appropriate for Temporary Repairs – this situation is more common with weather-related situations, such as a hailstorm. Many vehicles in a small area could have hail damage involving broken glass. The shops in the entire market area will tend to get loaded up quickly. In this case, it may be appropriate to do temporary repairs to allow the customer to continue driving the vehicle until the shop has capacity to get them scheduled in for repairs to correct body panel damage. Work in Process -Scheduling Considerations – when making scheduling decisions, it is not only important to understand your production shop available capacity, but also your available capacity by labor type. -Structural Repairs – in most cases, when a vehicle is in need of heavy structural repairs, the vehicle will be non-drivable and the vehicle will need to be staged for repair when the necessary capacity is available. However, it is not uncommon for a drivable vehicle to require some minor structural repairs, so the WIP and available capacity for the technicians capable of completing this type of repair will need to be factored into your scheduling decision. For example: You are inspecting a vehicle on Wednesday afternoon that will require some minor structural repairs before any other repairs can proceed. Your structural repair technicians are scheduled on other repairs until the end of the day on the following Monday. In this case, there is likely no value in bringing that vehicle in for repairs until your structural technicians have available capacity, even if your body repair technicians do have available capacity. -Express Lane – some repair facilities have established an Express Lane for vehicles with minor damage. These are small “quick” repairs that include small dent repairs only, meaning those confined to one panel. These repairs can be routed so the repair process bypasses others, as a result, these small jobs are not treated as job fillers. These Express Lane repairs may be tracked and scheduled separately from standard production shop repairs. Initial Parts Order -Option Identification Label – some vehicles have a label that identifies all of the options, trims, and accessories that were installed on the vehicle when it was assembled. This label may also have the exterior paint code. The option identification label may be located in the trunk or glove box. In most cases, the repair shop will need dealer assistance to decode the option identification label. A photograph of the label may be useful when ordering parts. -Ordering Parts – there are some key pieces of information that will be necessary to ensure accurate parts orders, such as -Accurate and complete VIN -Vehicle options -Production date -Trim code -Partial Disassembly – in some cases, it may be a good idea to perform a partial disassembly of the vehicle to identify any potential hidden damages and all of the parts that can be ordered prior to the vehicle arriving for repairs. This involves taking the vehicle apart to locate damage, and then putting it back together without repairing it. Partial disassembly may also include recording stages of the disassembly with digital photos, and taking point-to-point measurements. This could be done with a tape measure or electronic measuring system. If electronic measuring is available, a printout of the measurements could be used. Staging and Communication -Updating the Management System – for most shops, the computer management system is the hub of their nonverbal communication process. Making updates to the computer management system benefits the facility as a whole. The management system is typically updated by all employees in one way or another, and these updates can have substantial effect on available capacity, parts ordering, and scheduling. Customers, parts vendors, or rental car companies may be updated by the action you take on the system. -Current and Accurate Information – each department should update the management system for the area for which they are responsible, and monitor the sections of the management system that directly affect them. The production manager would typically be responsible for updating the repair status for each of the vehicles currently in the production shop and in staging, waiting to enter the production shop. The estimator or front office staff would typically be responsible for scheduling customers in for repair and for the information regarding repair labor, parts, and arrival date. Both of these activities have a signification impact on the available capacity showing in your scheduling system. For example: -Inaccurate information from the production side will result in inaccurate WIP and capacity information going into the scheduling system. -Inaccurate information from the estimator could result in an over-scheduling issue due to inaccurate information about incoming repairs. -Conclusion – it is critical to the success of any shop to ensure there is a scheduling system in place based on accurate and current information that is understood by all employees involved in the scheduling process. In addition to the obvious impact that improper scheduling can cause in the production shop, it will typically have a substantial impact on cycle time, which will result in frustration for your insurance partners and reduced CSI scores from your customers. -Sectioning Procedures – sectioning should never make the repair area any stronger or weaker than the factory design. Sleeves and reinforcements should only be used when recommended by the vehicle maker. It is important to note that the procedures provided by the vehicle maker are service specifications, not recommendations. I-CAR’s position is that if vehicle maker procedures or recommendations are not available, DO NOT SECTION. Note: Complete part replacement is recommended when sectioning procedures are not provided -Vehicle Maker Procedures – vehicle maker sectioning procedures may be found on vehicle maker service information websites. -Sectioning and Steel Strength Ratings – structural parts are made from various high-strength steels and have complex shapes to decrease vehicle weight and increase passenger safety. The lightweight materials and designs are used by vehicle makers to get parts to collapse in a specific manner when under collision forces. Adding a sectioning joint to a part that is not approved by vehicle makers may alter how the part will perform in future collisions. -Recommendation Concerns – vehicles are safer due to new designs, and because of this, crash injuries and deaths have steadily declined. If you make a conscious decision to disregard vehicle maker specifications, you need to ask yourself, ‘Am I willing to assume liability should the repair fail during a subsequent collision?’. Automotive engineers develop the repair procedures to ensure crashworthiness. It is very important to follow these procedures to ensure the vehicle parts perform as designed. Sectioning Preparation -Vehicle Preparation for Sectioning – when preparing a vehicle for sectioning, all body dimensions must be restored, even on damaged parts on the vehicle underbody, upperbody, and underhood. This requires: -The vehicle being secured to a bench -Following best practices for straightening, such as only applying heat to parts that will be replaced -Verify the Correct Replacement Part – during the parts receiving process, all parts should be checked when they are received to ensure the correct part was delivered. Even though the part seems to fit the vehicle being repaired, and it looks like the same part, there can be subtle variations due to a mid-year design change. Before cutting the part, the technician should make one last check to: -Ensure the service part is compared to the original by making a visual inspection and taking measurements -Verify that the shapes, mounting locations, and feature lines match the original part -Note: On occasion, the parts may be superseded and have variations in design. If this is encountered, the OEM documentation should be placed in the job file. -Measuring Cut Line – in order to locate the sectioning cut line, note that some vehicle makers stamp die marks on their parts to identify the cut location. Lines are scribed from the die mark around the circumference of the part. Some vehicles may have a mark that looks like a die mark, but note that this is not a cut location. For this reason, always verify the sectioning cut line location with the body repair manual. -Measuring Methods – measurements may be provided from the vehicle maker from a specific reference point, such as the tip of a rail. If a part is collapsed, and the vehicle maker provides measurements from the tip of the part, the service part may be used to help locate the line on the damaged part. This is done by measuring from the tip of the service part to the cut line location. At this point, make a scribe mark around the service part. Measure from a reference point rearward of the scribe mark on the service part. Next, locate the same reference point on the damaged part. Measure to the cut line and scribe a mark around the circumference of the damaged part. -Measuring from Two Points – when measuring, it may be useful to measure two points on the service part – one point ahead of the sectioning cut line and one point behind. Make this measurement on each side of the part. After the part has been cut and fit up to the vehicle, use these measurements to verify the proper position of the part. Note that this is done in addition to using mechanical or electronic measurements. It is one more method that can ensure your part is in the proper position before welding -Transferring Template Measurements – templates may be used to transfer cut lines from the service part to the damaged part and vice versa. Templates are made by the technician. These may be made from masking tape, adhesively backed spark paper, or cardboard. When using items such as masking tape or spark paper, note the tackiness of the product. If it is too sticky, it will be difficult to remove the template without tearing. Templates may be used with other methods to determine cut lines -Marking the Cut Line – a scratch awl should be used to mark the cut line to allow for an accurate measurement. Thick marker lines may cause inaccurate measurements as these lines may be a couple millimeters wide. The side of the cut line that will be cut should also be marked. Masking tape can help provide a straight edge in areas where part contours make it difficult to use a ruler to draw straight lines. If tape is used, mark the side that is the cut side. Note: Recheck measurements against the body repair manual to verify the proper location. Have a fellow technician verify the cut line location using the body repair manual as well to reduce the chance for error. Sectioning Overview (1/4) Sectioning Overview -Part Sectioning Overview – some repairs may require sectioning or a complete part replacement. -Why Parts are Replaced – part replacement, either through sectioning or complete part replacement, is done when parts are damaged beyond repair. The kink vs bend rule may have been used to make this determination. Kinked metal means that the steel has been damaged to the point where structural integrity is lost. However, on higher strength steel, such as ultra-high-strength steel (UHSS), even bends may not be repairable since the part may crack under the pulling forces before the part is straightened. -Damage Analysis – as a best practice, steel above 600 MPa should be checked for micro-cracking after straightening. The location of the damage is one factor that may have been considered during damage analysis. There may not be access to properly straighten a part. Another factor is the shape of the part in the damaged area. It is difficult to straighten a part with several different curves or convoluted areas. Additionally, if the area is a crush zone, straightening is not an option. -Sectioning Defined – sectioning is defined as the process of cutting a portion of a part based on the location of collision damage and vehicle maker recommendations, removing the damaged portion of the part, and installing a portion of the undamaged service part. Some service parts, however, are provided pre-cut based on the sectioning location, so cutting the service part is not necessary. Sectioning is a process that is done away from a factory seam -Benefits of Sectioning – there are several benefits of sectioning a part, such as: -Allowing a smaller area of a part to be replaced -Disturbing fewer original welds and factory seams -Disturbing less of the original corrosion protection -Requiring less disassembly -Preventing a vehicle from becoming a total loss -Note: Overall, sectioning can be a much less invasive repair by keeping the repair to a much smaller area of the vehicle Sectioning Guidelines -General Sectioning Guidelines – years ago, general sectioning guidelines were developed to assist collision repair technicians in choosing the appropriate location in the event the vehicle maker did not provide a location. These guidelines were: -Originally based on the extensive use of mild steel throughout the vehicle structure -Applied when vehicle construction had more simplistic part shapes -Used when there were fewer reinforcements compared to today’s vehicles. -Note: General sectioning guidelines are no longer used -Sectioning and Newer Vehicle Designs – general sectioning guidelines are no longer used for a variety of reasons. Newer vehicles use more inner reinforcements or use reinforcements that cannot be exposed to heat. Increased safety standards have also resulted in vehicle makers making the passenger compartment more intrusion-resistant. Newer designs use a considerable amount of thinner gauge, high-strength steel to lighten the vehicle structure. An increasing amount of tailor-rolled and tailor-welded blanks are used as well, making it difficult to identify crush zones, as there are no distinct lines that show the variations in steel strength. Additionally, current vehicles have more complex shapes used in the vehicle design. Sectioning Overview (2/4) Cutting and Welding Techniques Making Cuts for Sectioning Joints -Making Initial Cuts – to remove the bulk of the panel for sectioning, initial cuts are made into the panel. When making initial cuts: -Cut the parts, both the service and damaged parts, long enough so that they can be trimmed to size -Provide clearance by removing the spot welds and separating the outer panel from the inner panel on the damaged part, making sure not to damage flanges or reinforcements -Use scrap metal to protect the adjacent panels from chisel marks or saw cuts. The term ‘initial cut’ may also be referred to as a ‘rough cut’ -Cut-and-Join – when using the cut-and-join cutting technique, the replacement part must be overlapped with the existing part. Both are then cut at the same time somewhere in the overlap area. The cut-and-join technique is often used when making an open butt joint, but may be used when making a butt joint with backing -Lap-and-Scribe – when using the lap-and-scribe cutting technique: -The service part is overlapped with the existing part -A mark is scribed at the end of the service part -The service part is removed and a cut is made at the scribed location on the damaged existing part -Recommended Cutting Tools – when sectioning parts, the proper cutting tools must be used. This ensures a good clean cut using durable cutting equipment. Cutoff wheels or saw blades are commonly used. It may be helpful to identify the steel strength when selecting a cutting tool. The cutting tool must be able to handle high-strength steel parts. Note that the thickness of the cutting tool used can affect the width of the root gap. For example, a thin cutoff wheel or saw blade will minimize root gap on thin metal. When referencing cutting blades or wheels, the term ‘kerf’ may be used to refer to its thickness -Cutting to Avoid Reinforcements – reinforcements should not be cut when cutting a part for sectioning. Cutting into a reinforcement generally requires the reinforcement to be replaced. Reinforcements may be identified: -In the body repair manual -By panel flanges – panel flanges with three or more visible edges have an interior panel -By spot weld configuration – some spot welds that appear in the middle of a panel are a good indication that a reinforcement is present -Test-Fitting a Replacement Section – test-fitting: -May be done using clamps -May be done using fixtures if using a fixture measuring system -May require that the vehicle rests on its suspension. This varies according to vehicle stiffness. As more HSS and UHSS are used in vehicle construction, the vehicles tend to sag less under the weight of the drivetrain -Requires verification through measurements and adjacent panel fit-up -May require trimming back the service panel and the existing panel. Minor straightening of the panel edges may also be required to achieve proper fit with the adjacent panel -Note: When installing a replacement part, it must be test-fitted to ensure everything is in the proper location before the replacement part is welded in place Welding Sectioning Joints -Proper Root Gap – because an open butt joint has no backing, ensuring that you have the proper root gap is critical. Having the proper root gap can be the difference between having a solid weld, and one that has holes or poor penetration and panel warpage. Having proper root gap is also required when working on a butt joint with backing. If the gap is too narrow or nonexistent, there may be inadequate penetration into the backing. If its too wide, you can have burnthrough or it can be difficult to fill the gap, requiring extra passes -Frame Thickness – frames are typically thicker than most unibody parts. For example, exterior unibody panels typically measure around 0.8mm thick. Unibody frame rails and reinforcements can measure up to 1.75 mm thick. Full-frame rails on light-duty pickup trucks and SUVs commonly measure 3-4 mm thick, and can be much thicker on heavy-duty trucks. If not specified by the vehicle maker, it is a good practice to measure the thickness of the part to be welded to ensure the proper welding equipment and settings are used -Effect of Welding on Joint Area – heat can affect the properties of HSS and UHSS, making it considerably weaker. As material strength increases, the strength of the welded joint area will not be as strong as the undamaged portion of the part. Therefore, the metal adjacent to the weld is weakened and can become an unintended collapse zone -Tack Welding – after the section has been fit-up and appears to be in the proper location, it is tack welded in place. Tack welding allows the technician to: -Make final measurements to be made with the part partially welded in place -Verify the part is in the proper position before final welds are made -Gas Metal Arc Welds for Section Joints – it is important to have proper technique to ensure a quality weld. Proper gas metal arc (GMA) welding requires: -Monitoring the amount of heat being put into a weld. Excessive heat can affect the integrity of the joint, warp panels, or cause burnthrough -Making test welds on similar gauge scrap metal to tune the welder -Visual inspections and destructive tests should be done on test welds -Making stitch or skip welds in alternating locations will control heat in the joint -Making GMA Welds – skip welds are made far from the previous weld to minimize the heat-affect zone. Stitch welds are made adjacent to each other, but a brief pause is used between welds to allow metal to cool down. Similar to fillet welds, making plug welds all in one area can put too much heat into one area of the part. For this reason, alternate locations when making plug welds -GMA Weld Considerations – additional considerations for proper GMA welding include: -Offset sectioning joints – this may be recommended by some vehicle makers to stagger the heat-affect areas -Gaps create corrosion hot spots and unintended collapse zones -Do not use body filler, seam sealer, foam, or undercoating to fill gaps -Ensure that any gaps in the sectioning joint are completely welded closed -Welding Corners – when welding either inside or outside corners on a sectioning joint: -Start about 13 mm before the corner and weld about 13 mm past the corner -Never start a weld at the corner, as the weld might start cold, providing inadequate penetration -Plug Welds for Sectioning Joints – plug welds may be required when making a butt joint with backing to hold the backing in place. Some vehicle makers may recommend using a butt joint with backing where a larger insert is used. When making a butt joint with backing, alternate locations for both plug welds (if used) and fillet welds to control the heat-affect. Start on one side of the joint, then proceed to the other side. Plug weld hole size recommendations vary by vehicle maker. Typically they are between 6-10 mm, with 8 mm being the most common. Hole size often depends on the metal thickness -Using Adhesives – vehicle makers may have procedures that utilize adhesive alone on certain section joints; this is typically on outer body panels when specified. Adhesive may also be used in combination with plug welds, spot welds, or rivets. When used with plug welds, adhesive must be applied away from the weld zone. When used with spot welds, adhesive must be applied over the entire flange for corrosion protection. Using welds, spot or plug, and adhesive to attach a panel is called ‘weld bonding’. Note: Adhesive may be used to make a sectioning joint when recommended by the vehicle maker. Sectioning joints made with adhesive can help with strength and rigidity of the joint -Adhesive Butt Joints with Backing – some vehicle makers recommend a butt joint with backing sectioning joint that uses adhesives only. When making this type of joint, the backing is adhesively bonded in place. The mating surfaces of the backing and the panels being joined are sanded to bare metal before the adhesive is applied -Using Adhesive and Rivets – some vehicle makers recommend sectioning procedures that do not use any welds, but rather adhesives and rivets. Sectioning joints that use adhesive and rivets instead of welds are primarily used on outer body panels and frame rails Sectioning Overview (3/4) Sectioning Joint Types GMA Welded Sectioning Joints -Sectioning Joint Usage – GMA welded sectioning joints include an open butt joint, a butt joint with backing, and an offset joint, as well as a lap joint, which can be flat, flanged, or tapered. Joint usage varies by vehicle maker and is often based on joint location. An open butt joint may be preferred in visible areas, such as a sail panel, while a lap joint may be recommended in hidden areas. Joint usage may also depend on heat exposure. Lap joints may be used on heat-sensitive steel to limit the heat-affect zone. Regardless of the joint used, heat-control techniques should be used to avoid panel warpage and limit the heat-affect zone -Left = Butt Joint with Backing. Middle = Tapered Lap Joint. Right = Offset Joint -Vehicle Maker Recommendations – closely follow vehicle maker recommendations when determining which type of sectioning joint to use. Be sure to use the recommended joint for the part being sectioned. Do not assume that because a butt joint with backing was used on a rear rail, that the same joint can be used on a front rail. Joint types are vehicle-maker specific and are not interchangeable. In other words, do not use recommendations from one vehicle maker on a different vehicle. Always verify the joint type using the body repair manual. Note: The front rail shown here has multiple sectioning locations indicated by the black lines on the rail Making Sectioning Joints -Butt Joint with Backing – a butt joint with backing is made by butting two panels close together and using a backing plate behind the sectioning joint. A root gap between 1-3 metal thicknesses wide is commonly required. This varies according to the vehicle maker, and can even vary depending on the thickness of the metal. Some vehicle makers recommend a root gap that is 1.5 times the metal thickness at the sectioning joint. The joint is welded using a continuous weld bead, using a skip or stitch technique. Backings may either be fabricated or provided with the service part -50 mm sleeve -Backing Considerations – a backing is used to align the service part with the existing part. The sole purpose for some backings is for alignment. A backing also serves to maintain proper fusion and weld penetration while reducing burnthrough. It is important to maintain a consistent root gap – the procedure may have a specific root gap recommendation. Backings may alter the strength of a joint, changing crash characteristics. For this reason, backings should only be used when recommended -Making a Backing – when making a backing, the piece may be cut from a section of the damaged part or leftover service part. Flanges must be removed for the part to fit properly. Using a piece from the removed part ensures similarity in the contour and corrosion protection applied to the part. Another option is to use a multiple piece backing. A multiple piece backing may be used to provide a backing for the entire circumference of the part. This may require trimming the pieces together to fit inside the contours of the part and tack welding them together. -Backing Size – backing sizes can vary from vehicle maker to vehicle maker; however, sometimes it is up to the technician to determine the width of the backing. When determining the size, it may vary according to the cross section of the part being sectioning. For example, a rocker panel would have a larger insert than an A-pillar. The backing size may depend on available space on either side of the joint. In some situations, the reinforcements, holes, and part shape may limit the size of the backing. If the backing width is left to the technician, it is recommended to use the smallest size possible to limit potential corrosion issues -Preparing a Backing – before attaching the backing into the existing part, trim the flanges and grind off any burrs to help with a smooth fit. Apply weld-through primer to the bare metal area on the backing if recommended by the vehicle maker. Drill plug weld holes into the service part and existing part if recommended by the vehicle maker. Some vehicle makers recommend drilling 8 mm plug weld holes in the outer panel to attach the backing. Be sure to follow the vehicle maker recommendations for the hole size, number of plug welds, and distance -Pre-Sleeved Backing – some vehicle makers may service a backing separate from the service part. Some are shipped with the backing already installed. This screen shows a lower front rail sectioning service part that is shipped with the backing already fitted into the end of the part. Once the part is installed, the service section is plug welded in place, followed by a fillet weld along the seam. In some instances, alternative attachment methods, such as rivet bonding, may be specified by the vehicle maker -Flat Lap Joint – a flat lap joint is the most basic type of sectioning joint, where one sheet metal part laps over another. -Overlap Considerations – when making flat lap joints, a 25 mm overlap is commonly recommended. Plug welds may also be applied to the overlap area. Some vehicle makers state that this type of joint is helpful to reduce the heat-affect on reinforcements. Flat lap joints may be used on the pillars, rocker panels, and some rails. Always verify specific recommendations using the vehicle maker body repair manual -Making a Flat Lap Joint – when making a flat lap joint, note that body filler may be required to hide the joint in visible areas. A fillet weld is used at the section joint. With a flat lap joint the overlapped area is thicker, which can cause problems with trim attachment. For example, if there is an overlap joint in the door ring area, the weatherstripping may be difficult to install over the thicker joint area -Flanged Lap Joint – a flanged lap joint is where one sheet metal part is formed into a flange to accept the other sheet metal part. This results in a level outer surface -Applications – when making a flanged lap joint on pillars and rocker panels, an open butt joint or butt joint with backing is made on the pinchweld flange, depending on the part design. Notches may be made on the flange to ensure only one thickness, allowing weatherstripping and trim to fit properly. Note: Vehicle makers may have a combination of flanged lap and open butt joints based on the part design -Creating a Flange – when making a flanged lap joint: -Higher strength steel can make the flanging process more difficult -Manual or pneumatic flanging tools can be used to create the flange -Hand tools, such as a hammer and dolly, can be used to create the flange -Note: The flanging process may also inadvertently straighten a curved panel. For example, when flanging a sail panel, the curve of the sail panel can be straightened by the flanging process. If this happens, the curve must be put back into the panel so the contour is restored -Making a Tapered Lap Joint – when making a tapered lap joint, the ends of one part are to be bent inward at a 45-degree angle or less, depending on the vehicle maker recommendations. Corners are cut out so the ends can be bent downward. The piece with the bent down tabs is inserted into the existing piece. The bent down tabs serve as a backing for the welding process. -Offset Joints – offset joints are used: -For uniside assemblies and some front rail sectioning procedures -With lap joints, open butt joints, or butt joints with backing -When replacing two or more panels of a multi-layer assembly -To stagger the joint line, instead of having a single joint line completely around the circumference of the part. This distributes the joint stress, offsets the heat-affect zone, and helps with part alignment Sectioning Overview (4/4) Sectioning Considerations Part-Specific Sectioning Considerations -Part Specific Considerations – when sectioning, there are many part-specific considerations. -A-, B-, and C-Pillar – A-, B-, and C-Pillars often have UHSS reinforcements with limited sectioning procedures. These parts are often equipped with restraint systems on the vehicle interior side of the part. Restraint system parts must be removed or relocated before any repairs are begun. Pillars often contain materials, such as foam, which must be removed before welding and cutting operations take place. Materials must be reinstalled if removed. -Floor Pan – sectioning the passenger compartment floor is NOT recommended unless there is a procedure from the vehicle maker. Sectioning procedures for the rear trunk floor are more common. Typically a lap joint is made and often plug welded to the rear crossmember. Some procedures require overlap of the new floor over the existing floor. Seam sealers must be replaced. In some instances, even if there was no seam sealer on the trunk floor originally, it may be added to protect the sectioning joint. The rear body panel may need to be removed depending on the vehicle design -Front Rail – Lower/Upper – when sectioning the upper or lower rail on a vehicle -Crush zones are usually avoided when sectioning locations are chosen by the vehicle maker -Adjacent panels may need to be removed, such as the strut tower assembly, apron, or radiator core support -Some of the sectioning locations may require removal of the drivetrain -Radiator Core Support – sectioning is rarely done for repair of the radiator core support. Some procedures do exist, but only on older model vehicles. When sectioning, make sure the part is in the proper position - some vehicles have airbag sensors placed on the radiator core support. If the position of the support is off, or the strength is changed, this could delay or expedite deployment of the front airbags -Rear Body Panel – rear body panels may be made from UHSS; however, this is rare. Most rear body panels are made from a lower-strength steel. Sectioning procedures may be available for the rear body panel -Rear Rail -Considerations for sectioning the rear rail include possible removal of the trunk floor. Removal of the rear crossmember may also be required. The locations for sectioning depend on the vehicle maker recommendations -Rocker Panel – rocker panels: -Have reinforcements made from UHSS, and these are generally not sectioned -May have multiple reinforcements behind the base of the pillars -Have outer panels that typically have multiple sectioning locations -Are generally part of a uniside assembly -May have foam -Uniside – due to the lower strength of steel used for uniside construction, this particular part often has multiple sectioning locations. When sectioning unisides: -Make sure to avoid the reinforcement behind the panel during cutting operations -Weld-bonding is a common attachment method. As mentioned earlier in the course, some sectioning joints use bonding alone -Butt joints and butt joints with backing are often used for better joint appearance Sectioning Joint Considerations -Ultra-High-Strength Steel and Sectioning – not all UHSS parts are off-limits for sectioning. Some vehicle makers provide specific instructions for sectioning their UHSS parts. For example, some vehicle makers provide A- and B-pillar reinforcement sectioning procedures. Regardless of the vehicle maker, always follow the service procedures. Do not section UHSS parts without the vehicle maker’s recommendation -Cutting Outer Panels for Access - in the past, it was common practice to cut out access windows so the backside of a part could be accessed for straightening. For example, a portion of the trunk floor may have been removed to access the backside of the rear rail. When this si done, the area that is cut out is considered a sectioning joint. This is not recommended without a specific procedure. There are some vehicle makers that do allow windows to be cut. Often it is for adjacent part removal rather than straightening. Note: A vehicle maker may recommend an access window be cut when sectioning a part that is located beneath an outer panel -Sectioning Hydroformed Parts – it is often thought that hydroformed parts cannot be sectioned due to the part design. However, this is not necessarily true. Sectioning may sometimes be done. The sectioning decision is based more on steel strength and function than the forming process. Sectioning hydroformed parts still requires that a vehicle maker recommendation exists, but it is important to note that just because a part is hydroformed, does not mean it must be replaced at factory seams -Sectioning in Foam-Filled Areas – foam filler may be installed directly behind a sectioning joint or behind a portion of the part being sectioned. When working with foam filler, make sure it is removed from the weld zone before welding. Most foam is flammable and will burn if ignited from the heat of the welding process -Preserving Foam Fillers – if foam is inside the part, it may be beneficial to preserve the shape and integrity of the original foam material when separating panels or assemblies. In some instances, the foam piece can be installed by bonding it back in place. Foam removed during the sectioning process must be reinstalled. If the foam filler is directly behind the sectioning joint, it is replaced following the welding process. This may be done through an access hole. Foam filler may also be applied after corrosion protection is applied. Some replacement sections may come from the vehicle maker with foam filler installed -Foam Filler Precautions – do not weld near exposed foam filler. Most foam filler is combustible and will begin to melt if exposed to heat higher than about 575 degrees Fahrenheit. When cured foam filler begins to melt, it emits toxic chemicals, including carbon monoxide and cyanide gas. The foam filler will also melt when heat is applied during straightening, or if studs are welded to the part for pulling. Toxic fumes from the metled foam filler will escape from the foam-filled part. The foam filler inside a foam-filled part will not melt when it is cut with a saw. Note: Use respiratory protection when heating foam-filled parts. Other personal protection includes wearing safety glasses, neoprene gloves, and long-sleeved work clothes. Reference the safety data sheet (SDS) for additional information -Dressing Welds – dressing welds gives the repair its finished appearance. When dressing welds: -Make sure it is done in visible areas -Do not grind to the point where the metal is thinner than the adjacent metal -Do not grind into the base metal, as this will weaken the joint -Note: Some vehicle makers may recommend using dye penetrant to check for cracks in the weld after dressing the weld -Corrosion Protection – when completing the sectioning repair, apply corrosion protection to the backside and front side of the sectioning areas. Corrosion protecting the backside is especially important, as heat from the welding process has burned away the corrosion protection. Some vehicle makers may recommend an anti-corrosion compound. If a backing was used, moisture and contaminants can be held between the backing and part, making it particularly prone to corrosion. Anti-corrosion compound is often recommended in these areas, and multiple applications may be recommended Spray Guns -Overview – spray guns are used to apply coatings such as primers, sealers, basecoats, and clearcoats. It does this by atomizing, or breaking down the material into small particles, as it exits the spray gun -Spray Gun Designs – spray guns may be gravity, siphon, or pressure feed -Gravity Feed – gravity feed spray guns operate by the paint cup being located above the spray gun body. Fluid will flow out of a gravity feed spray gun when there is no air pressure and the trigger is pulsed. This is because material moves through the spray gun by gravitational force and not vacuum. -Siphon Feed- a siphon feed spray gun has the paint cup located below the spray gun body. The material is drawn out of the spray gun by vacuum created by the air cap. Atmospheric pressure inside the paint cup forces the material up through the spray gun body and out of the fluid needle -Pressure Feed – pressure feed spray guns, though common at one time in the industry for spraying refinish materials, are now typically used to apply chip-resistant coatings and corrosion protection materials. A pressure feed spray gun operates by pressurizing the cup which allows thicker materials to be atomized -Spray Gun Types – spray guns used for refinishing may be high pressure, or HP, high volume low pressure, or HVLP, reduced pressure, or RP, and low volume pressure, or LVLP. An HP spray gun uses high pressure, low volume air. This type of spray gun may also be referenced to as conventional. HP spray guns are considered old technology. HVLP, LVLP, and RP spray guns are considered high transfer efficiency equipment. -Air Pressure Comparison – HVLP spray guns are similar in construction and adjustments to HP spray guns, but use lower air pressure than HP spray guns. HVLP spray guns generally use about 25-35 psi at the inlet instead of 70-90 psi like an HP spray gun. When the air pressure is measured at the air cap, the pressure is reduced to 10 psi or less. HVLP spray guns also require large amounts of air. Some spray guns may require up to 25 cubic feet per minute, or cfm -HVLP Spray Guns – HVLP spray guns produce less overspray when compared to HP spray guns. HVLP spray guns are held closer to the surface and have better transfer efficiency than HP spray guns. This may also reduce the amount of refinish material that is used. Proper training and practice are necessary for material use to be reduced. Additionally, HVLP spray guns may extend the intervals between spraybooth cleaning. This is a result of better control and less material use. -RP Spray Guns – an RP spray gun generally uses a reduced inlet pressure of 25-32 psi that allows the gun to achieve transfer efficiency above 65%, even though the gun does not have 10 psi or less at the air cap. This type of spray gun is primarily used for high solid clearcoats, as it aids in the atomization and evaporation of solvents and reducers to allow for an improved transfer of material. -LVLP Spray Guns – LVLP spray guns use a lower volume of air to atomize the paint at the cap. LVLP spray guns have a slight reduction in spraying speed with a softer spray and lower overspray levels. They are not designed to spray large areas -Spray Gun Body – the body of the spray gun attaches to the paint cup and houses many working parts. All of the air passages and fluid passages are machined through the body of the spray gun. Most spray gun bodies are made of aluminum. HVLP spray guns have larger air passages through the spray gun body. This allows higher volumes of compressed air -Spray Gun Trigger – the spray gun trigger involves two steps. In the first step, the trigger opens the air valves, filling the chambers with compressed air. The second step pulls the fluid needle off its seat. This allows the refinish material to flow past the needle tip and into the airstream to be atomized. The trigger opens and closes the air valve and fluid valve. When a trigger is pulled part of the way, the air valve is opened. When the trigger is pulled further, the fluid valve is opened because the fluid needle is pulsed off of its seat in the fluid nozzle -Air Valve – the air valve allows the flow of air when the valve is moved away from its seat. The amount of air is controlled by the air adjusting valve and pattern control knob -Paint Cup – the paint cup is mounted to the spray gun body. It may be disposable plastic with a built-in strainer. Refer to the paint maker’s technical data sheet to verify the correct strainer type to use. Paint cups may also be metal, though it may be recommended to use a coated or plastic paint cup with certain materials, such as etching primers and waterborne products, as they may cause damage to uncoated metal paint cups. Some refinish materials should not be left in a metal paint cup for extended periods of time -Waterborne Spray Guns – spray guns for waterborne refinish materials have a needle and nozzle typically made of stainless steel. The paint cups are made of plastic or stainless steel. Most plastic paint cups are disposable, reducing the amount of cleanup required. If the spray gun is aluminum, it will have special coatings to resist corrosion. Bare aluminum may corrode over time from repeated exposure to waterborne refinish materials. It is important to follow the spray gun maker’s procedures to avoid premature corrosion. There are special considerations when selecting a spray gun for waterborne refinish materials. Waterborne spray guns must have corrosion-resistant parts. Some older model solvent-borne spray guns may have conversion kits available to be able to spray waterborne refinish materials. -Fluid Needle and Nozzle – the fluid needles and fluid nozzles are matched to the spray gun and the material being sprayed to create a quality finish. They should not be interchanged with other needle and nozzle sizes outside of the manufacturer’s recommendations for the type of spray gun and material being sprayed. Fluid needles and nozzles may be numerically identified. The larger the number, the larger the orifices. Larger numbers and diameter orifices are used to spray thicker materials -Fluid Needle – the fluid needle is opened and closed by the trigger. It is used to control the amount of fluid sent to the air stream. The opening between the nozzle seat and tip of the fluid needle valve determines the amount of fluid that can flow through -Fluid Nozzle – the fluid nozzle works with the fluid needle valve to meter fluid into the air stream. It forms an internal seat for the fluid needle valve to shut off the fluid flow. The fluid nozzle has openings that determine the maximum amount of fluid that can be delivered. The nozzle also provides air flow to the air cap. -Air Caps – air caps can impact the speed and quality of refinish operations -Air Cap Passages – the air cap passages direct air past the fluid needle. These passages are the center hole, auxiliary holes, and side holes. The center hole creates a vacuum to pull refinish material into the air stream. The auxiliary holes are in the middle and help achieve full atomization. The side holes use air pressure to form the spray pattern. This part of the air cap may also be referred to as the air horns -Air Cap Types – the type of air cap may also affect the amount of fluid flow through the spray gun and air pressure required to deliver satisfactory results. The paint maker may recommend a specific air cap for proper application of individual refinish materials. Spray gun air caps are typically coated with a nickel plating on the outside and brass on the inside. In addition to providing corrosion resistance, this special coating helps in cleaning waterborne refinishing materials from the spray gun -Fan Adjustment Knob – the fan adjustment knob is generally located on the top of the spray gun body, though it may also be found on the side of the spray gun. The fan adjustment is used to control the size of the spray pattern. Along with changing the physical spray pattern, the fan adjustment can also affect the atomization of the material being sprayed. -Fan Adjustment – spray guns may produce a spray pattern that is a small diameter circle or a long oblong pattern. To create a small, round pattern with dense coverage, turn in the knob all the way. To form a vertical, elongated pattern with lighter coverage, turn the knob gradually out. If turned too far, the pattern will be too heavy on the ends and too light in the middle. -Fluid Control Adjustment – the fluid control adjustment is used to change the amount of material released from the spray gun by limiting the travel of the fluid needle. The fluid control is located at the rear of a spray gun. Fluid control adjustment needs to be made before the refinish technician begins applying any type of material. An adjustment set too light will cause poor coverage, or hiding, and an adjustment set too heavy may cause runs. Turning the fluid control knob clockwise reduces the distance the fluid needle can open. Turning the knob counterclockwise increases the distance the fluid needle can open. -9 Pins that make up a typical HVLP spray gun -Air Cap -Coupling -Fluid Adjustment Knob -Fluid Control Knob -Fluid Needle -Fluid Nozzle -Pressure Gauge and Valve -Spray Gun Body -Trigger -Spray Gun Setup – before using a spray gun, verify that the correct fluid needle, nozzle, and air cap have been selected for the spray gun and refinish material being used. Make fluid adjustment for the material being sprayed and make sure the compressed air source is clean, dry, and regulated. The air source must provide the proper air volume and pressure according to the spray gun maker specifications. -Inlet Air Pressure – when adjusting air pressure at the inlet of the spray gun, keep in mind that spray gun makers will state a specific inlet air pressure. The proper inlet air pressure will reduce pressure at the air cap with the fan control wide open. The air pressure at the cap for an HVLP spray gun is 10 psi. -Adjusting Inlet Air Pressure – as the fan control is closed, the air cap pressure increases. Air regulators on the wall adjust the air supply to pressures required by the spray gun maker. Begin adjusting the air pressure at the regulator and allow for pressure drops if you are using long air hoses. The pressure gauge at the spray gun should be used to measure inlet air pressure. You can make minor air pressure adjustments at the valve on the gun. -Spray Gun Settings – when adjusting a spray gun, the refinish technician needs to be aware of what adjustments are needed. Adjustment options on the spray gun include fan adjustment and fluid control -Setup Charts – spray gun and paint makers compile a list of information for the refinish technician. This information offers a starting point for the technician when setting up a spray gun. The information provided on the chart helps eliminate the guesswork for what fluid needle, fluid nozzle, and air cap should be used for specific materials being sprayed. Paint makers post the required fluid needle and nozzle size for optimum spray results. Refer to their spray gun specifications for which fluid needle and nozzle will work the best -Testing for Fluid Distribution – when testing for fluid distribution, begin with rotating the air cap so that the air horns are straight up and down. This will produce a horizontal spray pattern. Hold the spray gun 8-10” from the surface and pull the trigger until the refinish material begins to run. The runs will be about the same length if all adjustments are correct. If the sides sag more, the air pressure is too high or the fan adjustment knob is set too wide. If the center sags more, either turn out the fan adjustment knob, turn in the fluid control knob, or increase air pressure -Spraying a Test Pattern – a spray test pattern is used to ensure the gun is applying an even coat to the panel. A spray test pattern should be sprayed before applying any refinish material to the vehicle. That way any problems can be corrected. A spray test pattern should be sprayed on masking paper, not on the spraybooth walls. Hold the spray gun about 8-10” from the surface, pull the trigger, and release it quickly. The spray pattern should be a slender, vertical oval, with even coverage. An improper spray pattern may present an irregular pattern, like a crescent moon, a wise, center pattern, or a constricted, center pattern, similar to a figure eight -Proper Spray Gun Use – to properly use a spray gun, hold the spray gun the recommended distance from the panel while leveling and perpendicular to the panel. Keep the spray gun perpendicular to the surface at all times, following the angles and curves of the vehicle with a wrist motion. Being moving before pulling the trigger. This should occur before nearing a refinish panel. Refinish material application should start just before reaching the edge of the panel. Move the spray gun in a steady, even motion. Release the trigger before stopping movement of the spray gun. Do not fan the spray gun. Fanning is permitted only when spraying a small spot repair area. Refer to the paint maker’s technical data sheet for spray gun setup and application recommendations. -Personal Protection – working with hazardous materials can present health problems if you do not follow important safety precautions -Respirator – respirators are required because refinish materials can irritate the nose, throat, and lungs. OSHA regulations require the use of respiratory protection. For the best protection, a fresh-air respirator is recommended over a cartridge-type respirator. Protective goggles should also be worn is using a half-face respirator. -Paint Suit – a paint suit protects the technician from exposure to refinish materials and overspray. It also provides full body protection because it is worn over other clothing. Long sleeves and pants may also be worn to cover as much skin as possible -Head Sock – a head sock or painter’s cap is used to help prevent hazardous materials from entering the body through the scalp. It should be worn with mask-type respirators -Gloves – wear chemical-resistant gloves, such as nitrile gloves. They protect your hands from exposure to refinish materials -Spray Gun Maintenance – when maintaining a spray gun, lubricate moving parts on a regular basis to help minimize wear and prolong the life of a spray gun. When lubricating a spray gun, use a lubricant that is designed to be used on spray guns, is compatible with refinish materials, and will not contaminate the finish. Do not use conventional oil, such as engine oil, transmission fluid, WD-40, spray or liquid silicone, Liquid Wrench, or air tool oil. These will cause defects in the refinish materials. -Spray Gun Maintenance (cont’d) – it is also important to be able to identify what parts wear out, how often they need replacement, and the availability of parts for the specific spray gun. Know if the spray gun needs to be returned to the manufacturer for repair, or if a rebuild kit is available and what parts are included in the kit. -Spray Gun Cleaning – spray guns should be properly cleaned and maintained to prevent refinish defects. Only use tools that are designed specifically for cleaning the fluid nozzle. For example, do not use paperclips to clean fluid nozzle holes. Doing so can cause damage and affect the spray pattern -Waterborne Cleaning – for waterborne cleaning, clean the spray gun immediately after use. If a spray gun is left to sit with refinishing material still inside, the waterborne material may etch the inner surface, making future cleaning difficult. The spray gun maker may recommend that cleaning solution not enter the air passage. This prevents any etching of the air passage walls. Clean the spray gun with the paint maker’s recommended solution. This helps ensure that the spray gun continues to operate properly and contaminants are not transferred to other refinishing jobs. Once cleaned, use compressed air to dry the inside and outside of the spray gun that has been cleaned with waterborne materials to prevent corrosion issues. -Solvent-Borne Cleaning – for solvent-borne cleaning, do not immerse and soak a spray gun in solvent. Doing so can cause the holes and passages to become blocked with loosened residual refinish materials. This may also strip the needed lubrication. If switching from waterborne to solvent-borne material, or vice versa, make sure the spray gun is properly flushed and dried thoroughly before use. Failure to do so can alter the new refinish material and create sludge in the spray gun. Steel GMA Welding Theory (1/2) Gas Metal Arc Welding Introduction Steel GMA Welding Introductory Basics -Gas Metal Arc Welding Overview – gas metal arc or GMC welding is an electric arc welding process. For mayn years it has been referred to as MIG welding and often mistakenly. MIG welding refers to metal inert gas where an inert gas is used to shield the weld puddle. This is typically associated with welding aluminum. MAG (metal active gas) is where the shielding gas has a reactive component in the welding process, which is typically when welding steel. GMA welding: -Is a consumable electrode, wire feed welding process -Has a welding electrode that is a continuously fed spool of wire -Deposits an electrode as a filler metal into a molten weld puddle to produce a weld bead -Produces heat using a short electric arc between the base metal and a bare wire electrode -Uses an externally supplied shielding gas to protect the molten weld pool from atmospheric contamination that would compromise the quality of the weld -Vehicle Protection – induction of current or voltage spikes can destroy sensitive electronic parts. When welding: -Keep the current path short by placing the work clamp close to the weld site -Disconnect and isolate both battery cables (remove the negative battery cable first) -Keep the welding machine as far away from vehicle computers as possible -Route cables away from computers or sensors -Remove computers or other sensitive electronic parts if welding close than 300 mm or 12 in -Cover glass and other areas of the vehicle with a welding blanket to protect from welding sparks -Personal Safety – for safety purposes there are specific clothing, equipment, and practices recommended to protect technicians when welding. Safety equipment and clothing include the following: -NIOSH-approved welding respirator -Welding helmet -Ear protection -Safety glasses -Leather gloves, sleeves, and welding jacket -Leather boots -No matches or lighters in pockets -Fire extinguisher nearby Electrical Principles of GMA Welding -Basic Electrical Overview – -in order to understand how welding works, it is important to understand some of the basics of electricity. Basic electrical terms include: -Voltage -Current -Resistance -Voltage – voltage is the pressure that is applied to an electrical circuit that forces current to move through a conductor. The more voltage, the greater the current flow -Current – current is the flow of electrons in a circuit. It is the number of electrons that flow past a given point in a circuit in a given period of time. Current may also be called amperage and is measured in amps -Resistance – resistance limits the flow of current. When there is more resistance, less current flows. Resistance is overcome by voltage. Increasing the voltage in a circuit will apply more pressure to the electrons and force a higher flow of current. If resistance in a circuit is increased, and we want current flow to remain the same, then the voltage must be increased to push the current flow through the point of higher resistance -Electricity in GMA Welding – arc welding converts electrical energy to heat or thermal energy. The heat of the arch melts both the base metal and the electrode. The electrical output of the welder through the filler wire is what produces this heat. The amount of heat put into the base metal is a function of the voltage and current outputs of the welder and the travel speed at which the welding gun is moving. During welding, there is enough heat generated to bring metal to a molten state -Current and Wire Speed – wire speed equals current. Increasing wire speed creates less resistance due to the shorter arc length. Increasing the wire speed will put more wire, and thus more current, into the weld puddle. Increased current will increase the heat in the weld puddle. The current capacity of the welder must be sufficient for the thickness of the metal being welded. -Bead Penetration – the current output will affect the penetration. The more current, the deeper the weld bead will penetrate into the base metal -Deposition Rate – the amperage output determines the deposition rate of the electrode wire. Current is controlled by the amount of wire being fed into the weld. Higher amperage settings will deposit more electrode wire than lower amperage settings. Amperage settings will have an effect on the weld bead size. Higher current will result in a larger weld bead size than lower current -Voltage Output – the voltage output remains constant once it is set. An exception to this is synergic machines. The voltage output of the welding machine also controls the length and size of the arc. Changing the length and width of the arc has an effect on the height and width of the weld bead. The voltage must be matched to the amperage setting being used because it controls the melting rate of the electrode wire -Synergic Welders – synergic machines do automatically what a technician must do manually on other machines, which is adjust the current and voltage settings together. Synergic machines use a computer to control the voltage and wire speed of the machine. The technician typically sets the welder based on material thickness. Amperage, wire speed, and voltage are set by the machine and may also be fine tuned individually. -Resistance in GMA Welding – resistance is the gap between the electrode wire and the workpiece. The main variable in the welding circuit that affects resistance is electrode extension or stick-out. Resistance in a welding circuit is also affected by arc length and electrode wire diameter. Shorter arc length equals less resistance and longer arc length equals more resistance -Polarity with GMA Welders – GMA welders are plugged into an alternating current or AC power supply. It is important that the AC power source is adequate for proper machine operation. The welding machine converts this AC power into direct current or DC power that is used to make the weld. GMA welders can be set to either straight or reverse polarity. Switching polarity of a GMA welding machine typically involves reversing the welding gun and work cable connections inside the machine -Reverse Polarity (DC Reverse) – reverse polarity (DC reverse) is when there is a positive electrode and negative workpiece. This is most often used for collision repairs because it provides the best weld, leaves less weld metal to grind off, and has a more stable arc. Reverse polarity is also called direct current electrode positive or DCEP -Straight Polarity (DC Straight) – straight polarity (DC straight) is when there is a negative electrode and positive workpiece. It is recommended when welding with flux-cored wire. Due to the current flowing from the electrode wire to the workpiece, straight polarity directs most of the heat to the workpiece rather than the electrode. Straight polarity is called direct current electrode negative or DCEN GMA Welding Transfer Processes -GMA Welding Transfer Methods – the deposit of the molten filler wire into the weld puddle is called transfer. The molten electrode wire may be transferred to the workpiece using one of three methods. These methods are short-circuit, spray-arc, and globular transfer -Short-Circuit Transfer Method – the short-circuit transfer method is the preferred method for welding on most sheet metal. Compared to the other transfer methods, short-circuit transfer generates less heat. This is because of the very thin electrode wire that is used along with lower current and voltage settings when compared to globular and spray transfer -Short-Circuit Transfer Sequence – there is a continuous process occurring at a rate of between 90 and 230 times per second in the short-circuit transfer mode using 0.6mm or .023 inch wire -1. The wire touches or short-circuits the base metal -2. The wire begins to break off from the heat generated -3. The wire separates, transferring metal to the weld puddle, and an arc is ignited between the end of the electrode wire and base meta -4. The heat of the arc flattens the weld puddle and the end of the electrode wire -5. The wire speed overcomes the arc heat -6. The wire touches the base metal and turns off the arc, starting the process over -Spray-Arc Method – spray-arc transfer: -Sprays a stream of tiny molten droplets across the arc to the base metal -Droplets are usually much smaller than the diameter of the electrode wire -Is achieved by using relatively high voltage and wire speed -Produces a humming or buzzing sound when parameters are correct -Globular Method – globular transfer: -Is when large globs of weld metal carried by gravity transfer from the wire across the arc to the weld pool -Globs or droplets are usually much larger than the wire diameter -Is considered a more unstable transfer with a rough weld bead appearance -Have welding parameters, amperage, voltage, and wire speed that are higher than for short-circuit transfer -Will usually result in splatter GMA Welding Equipment -GMA Welding Equipment – regardless of the type of welding machine used, each has a: -Power source -Spool of electrode wire -Wire feeder -Cylinder of shielding gas -Shielding gas regulator and flow meter -Welding gun and cable -Work clamp and cable -Power Source – GAM welders typically have power sources that operate an incoming voltage of either 220 or 110 volts AC. Actual voltages may range from 220 to 240 and 110 to 120. Every GMA welder has a related amperage output and duty cycle for the power source. The power source must be capable of delivering sufficient amperage and voltage to power the welder -Selecting Amperage – verify if the machine is capable of supplying the necessary amperage for a given thickness of metal. For thinner metal, maximum amperage is not required to produce a quality weld. The thickness of the metal being welded determines how much amperage is required to make a good weld. The formula of one amp required for every 0.025mm or 0.001 in of metal thickness is a good starting point -Duty Cycle – the duty cycle is how many minutes out of ten a welding machine can safely operate continuously at a rated amperage. Duty cycle is listed as a percentage and is typically posted on the welding machine. It can also be found in the operators manual. Duty cycle is not always rated at the maximum output of the welding machine. Operating a welding machine beyond its duty cycle will overheat the machine and produce poor quality welds or shut down -Duty Cycle Example – duty cycle will be different than what is listed if the welding machine is being operated at a different amperage than the rated amperage for the listed duty cycle. For example: -A 130-amp machine rated at 40% duty cycle at 90 amps can operate four out of ten minutes continuously at 90 amps. If the machine is operated at less than 90 amps, the machine will be able to run continuously for more than 4 minutes -If the machine is operated at more than 90 amps, the duty cycle will be less -Electrode Wire Spool – -The electrode is a bare metal wire that is wound on a spool and fed through the welding gun to the contact tip. Each type of electrode wire is identified by an American Welding Society, or AWS, code. A common electrode wire used for collision repair is ER70S-6. Using ER70S-6 as an example: -ER – electrode rod -70 – tensile strength of at least 70,000 psi -S – solid wire -6 – chemical makeup of the wire and its ability to keep oxygen out of the weld -Electrode Wire ER70S-3 – the electrode wire ER70S-3 contains a relatively low percentage of deoxidizers which help keep oxygen out of the weld site. It may produce welds of lower tensile and yield strengths when welding at high current or with straight CO2 shielding gas. ER70s-3 wire is recommended by some vehicle makers for full-frame welding procedures -Electrode Wire ER70S-6 – the electrode wire ER70S-6: -Contains high amounts of silicon and manganese -Produces smooth, well-shaped welds -Works well for overhead and vertical welds -Note: This type of electrode wire is recommended for most collision repairs -Uncommon Wires – there are other wires that are not commonly used in collision repairs. Vehicle makers will usually specify the wire type to use and may require a higher strength. Examples of uncommon wires include: -980 MPa welding wire -Flux-cored wire -980 MPa – Honda and Acura have specific welding wire requirements for 440-980 MPa steel. They require 980 MPa welding wire. The wire can be purchased through the Honda tool and Equipment Program. The electrode wire has a tensile strength of 1,011 MPa -Flux-Cored Wire – Flux-cored electrode wire may be recommended for specific applications by some vehicle makers. Flux-cored wire: -Has an inner core of flux material which acts like shielding gas and is designed to protect the weld from contaminants -Some vehicle makers may specify a shielding gas be used with flux-cored wire -Is only available in diameters of 0.8mm ( .030 in) or larger -Is not recommended for steels thinner than 18 gauge -Produces more spatter than solid wire and forms a slag that must be removed after welding -AWS Code for Flux-Cored Wire – the AWS code for flux-cored wire is different than for solid electrode. Using E71TGS as an example: -E – electrode -7 – tensile strength multiplied by ten-thousand (70,000 psi) -1 – can only be used in flat or horizontal position (1 means wire can be used in all positions) -T – tubular wire -GS – use and performance of the electrode wire -Note: The last digit can be any number between 1 and 11, or the letters ‘G’ or ‘GS’ depending on the recommended shielding gas, polarity, and number of passes required for the finished weld -115-Volt GMA Machines – 115-volt GMA welding machines may: -Be originally set up for flux-cored electrodes -Require switching the polarity of the machine -Require a conversion kit to weld with some electrode wires -Not be capable of supplying the current necessary for full-frames -Electrode Wire Diameter – the electrode wire diameter required for welding is based on the thickness of metal and the amperage required to weld a given thickness -0.6mm or .023 in electrode wire is recommended when welding between 30 and 90 amps -0.8mm or .030 in wire is recommended when welding in the 40 to 145 amp range -0.9mm or .035 in wire is recommended when welding in the 75 to 250 amp range -Note: For example, 18-gauge steel, which is 1.2mm thick, requires 48 amps, so it can be concluded that it should be welded with 0.6mm or .023 in electrode wire -Diameter vs Amperage – when the amperage range overlaps another diameter wire: -Either one can be used -Select a wire diameter where the amperage to be used is closest to the middle of the amperage range for the wire. This will help prevent a change in the type of weld transfer. Note: some vehicle makers may have specific recommendations for wire diameter -Wire Feeder – the wire feeder delivers the electrode wire from the welding machine to the contact tip at a constant speed. This speed determines the current -Burnback Control – welding machines may have an adjustable burnback control. This allows the welding current to stay on for a short time after the wire has stopped feeding, which allows the wire to burn back just enough to be ready for the next act. Too much burnback causes a ball on the wire end and an erratic start. This is separate from the wire feed speed -Shielding Gas – the shielding gas -Protects the weld site from the atmosphere that can cause defects in the weld -Is stored in a high-pressure cylinder that must be fastened securely in an upright position -Is a major factor in managing weld-pool heat -Active and Inert Shielding Gas – there are two types of shielding gases available for welding: active and inert -Active shielding gases protect the weld site and combine with the arc to make a hotter weld. CO2 is a common example of an active shielding gas -Inert shielding gases protect the weld site, but not combine with the arc. Argon and helium are common examples of inert shielding gases -Note: Shielding gas can be a single pure gas or a mixture of two or more gases. Active and inert shielding gases may be mixed with each other -Shielding Gas Choice Options – the type of shielding gas that should be used depends on the metal being welded. -75% argon and 25% CO2: -Is the recommended shielding gas for collision repair on mild and high-strength steels -Provides good weld strength properties, produces a smooth and stable arc, and a small weld puddle that sets up quickly. This is an advantage when welding out of position. -Pure CO2: -Reduces amperage required and provides dep weld penetration, but penetrates too deep on thin-gauge metal -Makes unstable arc which increases spatter -Makes the weld much hotter and it is not commonly recommended -Note: The industry is shifting toward more argon in the shielding gas mix, such as 80/20 and 90/10. Depending on location, these combinations can vary -Regulators and Flow Meters – -Regulators: -Attach to the gas cylinder -Reduce cylinder pressure to working pressure -Must be matched to the type of shielding gas used -Flow Meters: -Measure the flow rate of the shielding gas in cubic feet per hour, or cfh -Should be set between 25 and 30 cfh -Have shielding gas flow rates that may need to be increased when there is a breeze in the area where welding is being done -Note: Welding machines may have gas type and flow rate recommendations in the setup chart supplied with the machine -Welding Gun – A GMA welding gun consists of a gun liner, handle, trigger, neck, contact tip, and a shielding gas nozzle. Some may have a gas diffuser. We will cover the liner, contact tip, and nozzle. -Liner – the welding gun liner guides the electrode wire through the welding gun cable from the welding machine to the contact tip -Contact Tip / Tube – the contact tip: -Is responsible for transferring the current to the electrode wire so that an arc can be struck -Is usually made of copper or a copper alloy -Has the inside diameter stamped on the tip that must match the diameter of the electrode wire being used -Will wear over time and require periodic replacement -Shielding Gas Nozzles – the shielding gas nozzle directs the shielding gas toward the weld area and protects the contact tip. Shielding gas nozzleshave an insulator to prevent short-circuiting the machine to the workpiece. Shielding gas nozzles may be tapered or straight. Tapered nozzles are used for most collision repair welding. Straight nozzles are typically used when higher flow of shielding gas is required. There can be an anti-spatter compound applied to reduce spatter building between the nozzle and contact tip -Work Clamps – although work clamp completes the output electrical circuit for GMA welding, it is not the electrical ground for the welding machine. The ground connection is made through the power cord and goes from the machine to the building ground. The work clamp should be attached as close to the workpiece as possible and must be large enough to carry the current load without overheating Welding Machine Setup and Preparation -Welder Setup and Preparation – all maintenance and setup information can be found in the owners manual for the equipment. Before using a welding machine, learn how to: -1. Connect the welding gun and work cables and load the wire spool into the machine -2. Adjust the wire feeder and drive roll pressure for proper feeding of electrode wire -3. Set the flow rate for the shielding gas -4. Set and become familiar with the voltage and wire speed settings -5. Change the contact tip, insulator, and welding gun liner -Welding Area Surface Preparation – all contaminants must be removed from the weld area before welding. This can include the finish, any undercoating, corrosion, dirt, oil, or grease -Weld-Through Primer – weld-through primer should only be used if the vehicle maker recommends it. Apply it in areas where the galvanized coating has been removed. Weld-through primer: -Is available as sprayable or brush-on products -Protects the bare steel, usually with the use of zinc -Needs to have any excess or overspray removed for adhesion for refinish coatings -Should only be on the mating flanges between two parts -Should be removed from the immediate weld zone before welding -May cause porosity if left in the immediate weld zone -Variables – GMA welding depends on a number of operator variables, all of which must work together to make a good weld. These variables include: -Travel speed -Welding gun angle -Welding gun direction -Electrode stick-out -Joint fit-up -Amperage and voltage setting balance -Travel Speed – the technician controls travel speed. This is how fast the technician moves the welding gun along the joint. The travel speed can affect penetration, bead size, and shape. The correct travel speed to use will depend on a number of factors including the thickness of the material being welded, wire speed, and voltage -Slow Travel Speed – a travel speed that is too slow, with all other parameters being correct, will likely result in burn through on thinner gauge metals. Travel speeds that are too slow may also result in large, flat, and wide weld beads -Fast Travel Speed – a travel speed that is too fast, with all other parameters being correct, will result in poor penetration and inadequate fusion. There is not enough heat input into the metal to completely melt the base metal, and there is a reduction in the amount of weld metal deposited. The metal only melts near the surface, so the weld bead is not sufficiently wetted out and cannot penetrate into the base metal. This results in a tall and narrow weld bead that sits on top of the base metal -Welding Gun Angle – another important factor in a quality weld is the angle that the welding gun is held. The welding gun angle can be looked at in two different planes and broken down into two separate angles: travel angle and work angle -Travel Angle – travel angle is how much the welding gun is pointed either toward or away from the direction of gun travel. The amount of travel angle has an effect on weld bead penetration, shielding gas coverage, and arc stability. It also affects the amount of splatter produced by the weld. Excessive travel angles direct the heat and shielding gas away from the weld puddle, which can cause spatter and poor penetration. As travel angle increases, stick-out also increases. Excessive stick-out leads to a wandering and unstable arc -Work Angle – work angle is the angle that the plane of the welding gun has in relation to the joint being welded. Work angle controls where the electrode wire is aimed at the joint, and will vary according to the joint being welded. Work angle affects weld bead penetration and shape and shielding gas coverage. Incorrect work angles may lead to poor shielding gas coverage, inadequate penetration, and a poorly shaped weld bead with undercut. The electrode wire must be pointed where the weld bead is to be placed -Welding Techniques – when GMA welding steel, the welding gun can either be pushed or pulled along the joint -Pull Technique – the pull technique is when the welding gun is pointed at and dragged away from the weld puddle -It may also be called drag, or backhand -Compared to the push technique, the pull technique increases weld penetration. This is because it directs the heat of the arc at the weld puddle and preheated base metal -The pull technique is typically done using a 70 degree travel angle to the base metal, or 30 degree from perpendicular -Push Technique – the push technique is when the welding gun is pointed and pushed away from the weld -The push technique also uses a 70 degree travel angle to the workpiece -The push technique may be called forehand or lead angle -It produces a flatter, wider weld bead with less penetration than the pull technique because the heat from the arc is directed away from the weld puddle and preheated base metal -Stick-Out – another operator-controlled welding variable is stick-out, or contact tip height. Stick-out is the distance from the end of the contact tip to the end of the electrode wire. -When using 0.6mm (.023 in) electrode wire, stick-out should be between 6 and 13 mm or ¼ and ½ in -Stick-out should be held constant along the entire weld pass -For larger diameter wire, stick-out should be increased -Changes in stick-out change the amperage output of the welding machine. If stick-out is too short, resistance will decrease and amperage will increase. This will cause penetration to increase. If a stick-out is too long, the opposite will happen and penetration will decrease. Due to this, stick-out should be kept consistent for the entire length of the weld -Welding Position – it may be required to perform GMA welds in different positions depending on the location of the part. -Flat – welding in the flat positions is usually the easiest -Horizontal – welding in the horizontal position is usually easier if the welding gun is angled upward, but also depends on the joint -Vertical – welding in the vertical position is easier if the welding gun is angled upward and pulled down on thin-gauge metal -Overhead – overhead welds require lower heat settings than other positions to reduce the amount of spatter falling into the shielding gas nozzle or on the technician -Proper Joint Fit-Up – one variable in ensuring proper penetration is joint fit-up. Proper joint fit-up requires: -The mating flanges of the parts being welded to fit tightly together -Having the right amount of root gap on the joints -Using clamps, screws, or tack welds to hold the parts in the position -Removing screws after welding holes shut -Turning a GMA Welder – -To tune a GMA welding machine -1. Set the machine to the recommended voltage settings and set wire speed at mid-range position -2. Make a practice weld and listen for a steady crackling sound or look for a steady arc -While tuning the machine, be sure to: -Keep the proper stick-out for the wire diameter being used -Move the welding gun across the metal -Test the strength of the sample weld -Use the same metal thickness when practicing -Heat Management Techniques – if too much heat is directed at the workpiece during welding, it may distort and weaken the metal. Heat management is a combination of heat settings used, the time spent making the weld, and the location of the weld in relation to other welds just made. Welding techniques used to manage heat buildup include: -Skip welds -Stitch welds -Alternating plug welds -Stitch Welds – a stitch weld is made by stopping briefly between welds to allow the weld to slightly cool. Manual stitch welding may cause porosity in the weld due to the shielding gas flow stopping each time the trigger is released. Some welding machines are equipped with a stitch weld setting that automatically pulses the arc and leaves the shielding gas flowing -Skip Welds – skip welds are made by making welds in random areas along the joint and then filling in the spaces. Another way to make a skip weld is by starting in the middle of the joint and moving outwards toward the edges, alternating from side-to-side. When welding on heavy-gauge material, skip welds can create problems at the start and stop points. Tune the machine for the hottest possible start in these conditions -Alternating Plug Welds – heat management when making plug welds can include avoiding two or more plug welds next to each other. Randomly alternating the location that is welded will help allow areas to cool slightly before another weld is made and limit the buildup of heat. -Weld Penetration – the ability to recognize causes of weld defects is an important skill to develop. One of the most important characteristics of a quality weld is penetration. Here, we will discuss poor weld penetration and good weld penetration. -Poor Penetration – poor penetration may result in incomplete fusion and lead to failure of the weld. Heat settings that are too low, travel speed that is too fast, excess stick-out, not enough root gap, or an incorrect welding gun angle can all cause penetration problems -Good Penetration – there should be more than just a heat mark on the backside of a weld. If a small ripple can be felt on the backside of the workpiece, it is a sign of good weld penetration. This ripple is called melt-through -Adjusting Penetration – this chart can be used as a quick reference guide when adjusting for penetration and bead height problems. It is similar to a chart published by a welding machine maker. The numbers indicate the order in which the variables should be adjusted. For example, to increase penetration, amperage is the first adjustment that should be made -Burnthrough – if the heat settings are too high, it may melt through the workpiece and create a hole. This is called burnthrough. Burnthrough can also be caused by too slow a travel speed, stick-out that is too short, incorrect welding gun angle, or a root gap that is too wide -Weld Defects – there are a number of common weld defects that can occur because of incorrect welding machine settings or welding technique. These include: -Porosity -Cracks -Distortion -Spatter -Undercut -Overlap -Porosity – porosity, or holes in the weld, is one of the more common types of weld defects. Porosity can be caused by: -A lack of shielding gas -Setting the flow rate too high -A pinched or leaking shielding gas hose, or a plugged gas nozzle -Excessive stick-out -Undercut and Cracks – -Undercut is a groove cut into the base metal on both sides of the weld. Undercut occurs primarily when welding thicker metals, such as those found on full-frame vehicles. It can be caused by: -An unbalanced setting of the wire speed and voltage -Using an incorrect welding gun angle or travel speed -Cracks in welds on steel are not common in the collision repair industry due to thinner gauge steels used in vehicle construction. Cracks to the weld bead itself can be caused by: -A strain on the base metal from distortion -Incorrect heat settings -Voltage and current being set too high -Distortion – distortion is caused by: -An unsteady hand -A worn contact lip or excess stick-out that can cause the electrode to wander as it comes out -Voltage that is set too high causing the electrode to melt off in large drops with thinner areas in between -Electrode wire with internal strain or drive rolls extremely tight -Spatter – spatter is the term for metal particles that are blown away from the arc. A major problem with splatter is that it can cause permanent damage to glass and other adjacent parts. Spatter can result from: -A worn contact tip -The electrode wire being spooled too tight -Improper voltage and current settings -The wrong size or worn drive rolls -The welding gun being angled up or down too much -Dirt or corrosion on the base metal -The shielding gas flow rate set too low -Overlap – overlap is an excess amount of weld metal deposited on the top and either side of the weld bead. It can be caused by excess wire speed, not enough voltage, or too slow of a travel speed. Overlap requires more dressing of the weld before repairs can be continued -Dye Penetrant – weld defects are not always clearly visible. Because of this, there are dye penetrants available that can be used after welding to highlight cracks, skips, or porosity. It is critical to thoroughly remove all dye penetrant residue before continuing repairs GMA Welding Troubleshooting and Maintenance -Electrode Wire Cast and Helix – cast is the curvature of a length of welding wire caused by winding it on the spool. Helix is the pitch of a length of the wire. The straighter the wire, the easier it will come off of the spool and feed through the welding gun liner. There has to be some coil in the wire so that it touches the contact tip to transfer the current. The helix should be small to avoid the wire wandering as it leaves the contact tip -Checking Cast and Helix – checking cast and helix is a troubleshooting step that can be done if the electrode wire is not feeding properly. To check cast and helix: -1. Pull off about 10 ft or 300 cm of electrode wire and cut it with a pair of side-cut pliers -2. Loop the wire by hand, toss it on the floor, and allow it to unravel -3. Measure the cast of the wire. The cast is the diameter of the wire loop as it is lying loose on the floor -4. Measure the helix of the wire, which is the height above the floor -AWS Recommendations – the AWS has specific recommendations for cast and helix. For 0.8 mm (.030 in) or smaller wire, if the cast is at least 300 mm (12 in), and the helix is no more than 25 mm (1 in), the electrode wire is in proper working condition. If the electrode wire does not meet these specifications, do not use it. -Birdnesting – if no wire comes out of the contact tip when the trigger is pulled and the drive rolls keep on feeding the wire, birdnesting will occur. Birdnesting can be caused by too much tension on the drive rolls and the wire hitting a restriction in the gun liner or the contact tip -Troubleshooting – before attempting to fix birdnesting, always turn off the machine. Next, release the pressure on the drive rolls and remove and discard the electrode wire between the drive rolls and contact tip. After clearing it, reload the wire into the welding gun liner. Be sure to correct the problem that caused birdnesting and reduce the drive roll tension to avoid another occurrence -Vehicle Protection – induction of current or voltage spikes can destroy sensitive electronic parts. When welding: -Keep the current path short by placing the work clamp close to the weld site -Disconnect and isolate both battery cables (remove the negative battery cable first) -Keep the welding machine as far away from vehicle computers as possible -Route cables away from computers or sensor -Remove computers or other sensitive electronic parts if welding closer than 300 mm or 12 in -Cover glass and other areas of the vehicle with a welding blanket to protect from welding sparks Steel GMA Welding Theory (2/2) GMA Welds and Techniques Weld Descriptions -Weld Descriptions – here we will provide an overview of the four different GMA welds -Plug Weld – plug welds join two or more lapped pieces together with holes punched or drilled in the top piece, or top pieces. If more than two pieces are being joined together, both top pieces should have holes with the hole in the top piece slightly larger than the hole in the middle piece. Vehicle makers may have recommendations for plug weld hole size and location. If they do not, holes should be 8 mm or 5/16 in if the flange width will support it -Fillet Weld – the fillet weld is a triangular shaped weld bead that is deposited at the joint formed by two overlapping pieces. Fillet welds are commonly done on lap joints during collision repairs -Butt Joint with Backing Weld – the butt joint with backing weld joins two pieces and a backing piece at the joint location. The backing piece is typically the same thickness as the other two pieces. To allow penetration into the backing, a root gap, usually 2 to 3 thicknesses of the workpieces, is required. If the root gap is not wide enough, penetration into the backing will decrease and more heat will be required -Open Butt Joint Weld – the open butt joint weld joins two pieces nearly butted against one another. A small root gap between the pieces is required to allow for penetration of the weld and to minimize distortion of the pieces when they are welded. The root gap is usually around one metal thickness. Too large of a root gap, on thin gauge metal, will make welding the joint difficult Weld Techniques -Plug Weld Techniques – to make a plug weld, aim the electrode at the bottom piece, through the hole in the top piece, and circle around the hole making sure that all edges are fused with the bottom piece. The electrode wire should be at a 90 degree angle to the bottom piece to avoid trapping gas pockets in the weld. Plug welds may be easier to make if the heat settings are turned up slightly and a faster travel speed is used. There are two different ways to make plug welds -1. Start at the edge of the joint and move around the piece either clockwise or counterclockwise -2. Start in the center of the bottom coupon and move out towards the edges -Fillet Weld Technique – when making a fillet weld, the electrode wire is aimed at the joint, slightly off center toward the lower piece, using a 45 degree work angle. When welding two different thicknesses of metal with a fillet weld, the work angle should be adjusted so that the electrode wire is angled more toward the thicker piece. The welding gun may be either pushed or pulled at a 70 degree travel angle to the workpiece. However, making vertical fillet welds on a thin gauge material is typically easiest using the pull technique -Butt Joint with Backing Weld Technique – to make a butt joint with backing weld, the electrode wire is either pushed or pulled at a 70 degree travel angle to the workpiece while keeping the welding gun at a 90 degree work angle -Open Butt Joint Technique – to make an open butt joint weld, the technique is similar to the butt joint with backing weld Test Welds -Test Welds – before performing welds on a vehicle, make test welds on similar materials that would use the same surface preparation. After making test welds, visually inspect and destructively test them -Plug Weld – to visually inspect a plug weld, check the front side of the weld for evidence of cracks, porosity, skips, voids, and undercut. None should exist. The plug weld must also completely fill the hole and have a bead height of no more than 3 mm or 1/8 in. on the backside, there must be no burnthrough. Look for evidence of penetration, such as a raised ripple, or melt-through. The height of this melt-through should be no more than 1.5 mm or 1/16 in -Fillet Weld – inspect the front side of the weld for porosity, skips, and voids. These defects are acceptable if they are individually not more than 3mm or 1/8 in long for a 38 mm or 1 ½ in long weld. The weld should completely fill the joint, have no cracks or undercut, and have a bead height of 3 mm or 1/8 in or less. The backside of the fillet weld should also be visually inspected. There must not be any burnthrough that creates a hole and there should be melt-through or a ripple as evidence of penetration. The melt-through should have a width between 0 and 5 mm or 3 and 3/16 in, and a height no greater than 1.5mm or 1/16 in -Butt Joint with Backing Weld – to visually inspect the butt joint with backing, inspect the front side of the weld for porosity, skips, and voids. These defects are acceptable if they are individually not more than 3 mm or 1/8 in long for a 38 mm or 1 ½ in long weld. The weld should completely fill the joint, have no cracks or undercut, and should have a bead height of 3 mm or 1/8 in or less. On the backside there must be no burnthrough that creates a hole. Look for evidence of penetration, such as melt-through or a ripple on the backing piece. The melt-piece should have width close to the width of the weld on the front side and a height no greater than 1.5 mm or 1/16 in. the line left by the joint should not visible anywhere along the weld on the backside -Open Butt Joint Weld – to visually inspect the open butt joint weld, inspect the front side of the weld for porosity, skips, and voids. These defects are acceptable if they are individually not more than 3 mm or 1/8 in long for a 38 mm or 1 ½ in long weld. The weld should completely fill the joint, have no cracks or undercut, and should have a bead height of 3 mm or 1/8 in or less. On the backside there should be no burnthrough that creates a hole. Look for evidence of penetration, such as melt-through forming a weld bead on the backside, leaving no evidence of the original panel edges. The melt-through height should be no greater then 1.5 mm or 1/16 in Making the Weld -Making the Weld – each weld has specific steps required to make the weld on the vehicle. Here, we will list the steps for making each weld -Plug Weld – to make a plug weld on a vehicle -1. Clean the mating surfaces thoroughly. Avoid removing any zinc coating -2. Drill or punch holes in the top piece following the vehicle maker’s recommendation for the number, size, and location of the holes -3. Apply weld-through primer, if specified by the vehicle maker, to any mating surfaces that do not have a zinc coating -4. Tightly clamp the pieces together -5. Remove the excess weld-through primer from the lower piece, through the hole -6. Connect the work clamp as close to the weld site as possible -7. Make the plug welds using the settings that were determined from the test welds -8. Dress the welds. Make sure not to reduce the thickness of the surrounding metal or remove any of the galvanized coating -Fillet Weld – to make a fillet weld on a vehicle -1. Clean the mating surfaces thoroughly. Avoid removing any zinc coating -2. Apply weld-through primer to all mating surfaces, if specified by the vehicle maker, that do not have a zinc coating -3. Clamp the joint tightly together, and remove any exposed weld-through primer from the immediate weld zone -4. Attach the work clamp to a bare metal area of the vehicle, as close to the welding site as possible -5. Make the welds on the vehicle using the settings and techniques that were used to make successful test welds -6. Dress the welds, if necessary. If the welds are dressed, do not reduce the thickness of the surround metal or remove any galvanized coatings. Remove excess weld-through primer on the exterior surfaces before applying additional coatings -Butt Joint with Backing Weld – to make a butt joint with backing weld on a vehicle: -1. Clean the mating surfaces thoroughly. Avoid removing any zinc coating -2. Apply a weld-through primer, if specified by the vehicle maker, to all mating surfaces that do not have a zinc coating -3. Clamp the joint tightly together, leaving the proper root gap. Some procedures may call for the backing piece to be plug welded to one or both of the top pieces. 4. Remove any excess weld-through primer from the backing piece in the immediate weld zone -5. Attach the work clamp to a bare metal area of the vehicle, as close to the welding site as possible -6. Make the welds on the vehicle using the settings and techniques that were used to make successful test welds -7. Dress the welds, if necessary. If the welds are dressed, do not reduce the thickness of the surrounding metal or remove any zinc coatings. Remove excess weld-through primer on the exterior surfaces before applying additional coatings -Open Butt Joint Weld – to make an open butt joint weld on a vehicle: -1. Clean the mating surfaces thoroughly. Avoid removing any zinc coating -2. Clamp the joint tightly together, leaving the proper root gap -3. Attach the work clamp to a bare metal area of the vehicle, as close to the welding site as possible -4. Make the welds on the vehicle using the settings and techniques that were used to make successful test welds. The weld may be made continuously or by a series of short stitch welds. The open butt joint weld requires a welding technique that limits the amount of heat input into the weld to avoid burnthrough -5. Dress the welds, if necessary. If the welds are dressed, do not reduce the thickness of the surrounding metal or remove any galvanized coatings Steering and Suspension Operation (1/3) Steering System Operation Parallelogram Steering Systems -Steering Systems Description – types of steering systems used on vehicles include rack and pinion steering systems and parallelogram. Rack and pinion systems are the most commonly used on cars and light trucks, while parallelogram steering systems are typically found on heavy duty trucks (typically ¾ ton or greater) -Left is Rack and Pinion. Right is Parallelogram -Parallelogram Steering System Parts – a parallelogram steering system is typically used on heavy duty full-frame vehicles. Parts of a parallelogram steering system include the: -Steering gear box -Pitman arm -Idler arm -Center link -Tie rods -Steering shaft -Note: The steering gear box receives input from the steering column shaft. The rotation of the steering wheel is converted to the lateral movement of the steering linkage -Blue = Idler arm -Yellow = Tie rod -Red = Center link -Purple = Pitman arm -Green = Steering Gearbox -Orange = Steering shaft -Steering Gear Box – the worm gear, which receives direction from the shaft, has spiral grooves that move a ball nut back and forth. The teeth on the ball nut mesh with the sector shaft gear teeth and move the sector shaft when the worm gear is rotated. The sector shaft is part of the steering gear assembly. It is connected directly to the pitman arm and is also known as the pitman shaft. Movement of the sector shaft transfers the steering wheel motion to the horizontal steering system - Pitman arm on left. Sector shaft on top right. Worm gear on bottom right -Parallel Steering Linkage – a parallel steering linkage is composed of tie rods, an idler arm, a center link, and a pitman arm -Pitman Arm – the pitman arm connects the steering gear to the center link. It supports one side of the center link and moves the steering linkage to the right or left. The pitman arm positions the center link at the proper height -Center Link – The center link, also called the relay line, or drag link, transfer the movement of the pitman arm to the tie rods. The center link is positioned at the proper height for the tie rods to minimize toe change with suspension travel. A tapered-end-type link has the studs from the pitman arm and idler arm fit into the holes in the ends of the center link and is considered a non-wear-type link. Some center links have ball studs on the ends that fit into holes in the pitman and idler arms. The ball sockets on the center link may wear. This is considered a wear-type link -Idler Arm – the idler arm is connected to the center link with a ball stud. It keeps the center link parallel to the frame mountings. The idler arm support is bolted to the frame on the opposite end of the center link from the pitman arm and moves parallel to and in unison with the pitman arm -Tie Rod – the tie rod assembly connects the center link to the steering arms. The steering arms are connected to the steering knuckles. Steering arms may be part of the steering knuckle or bolted to the knuckle. The tie rod assembly consists of an inner and outer tie rod connected by an adjuster sleeve or tube. Each tie rod adjuster sleeve has left-hand and right-hand threads that attach to the tie rod end and tie rod. Sleeve rotation allows for adjustment to change the tie rod assembly length to set toe -Steering Damper – the steering damper, also called the stabilizer, helps absorb road shock and reduces the shock reaching the steering wheel. A steering damper is similar to a shock absorber. It is connected from one of the steering links to the chassis or frame. It is usually found on larger full-frame or off-road vehicles. When a front wheel strikes a road bumper, the shock is transferred from the front wheel to the steering linkage, steering gear, and steering wheel. The steering damper reduces the effect on the steering wheel. -Parallelogram Operation – a parallelogram steering system operates by using a steering gear box to transfer the steering movement from the steering shaft to the pitman arm. The pitman arm transfer steering motion to the center link. The center link then moves the tie rods, which are mounted to the steering knuckles. An idler arm is connected to the center link on the opposite end from the pitman arm. Rack and Pinion Steering Systems -Rack and Pinion Steering Parts – rack and pinion steering systems are lighter weight, have fewer external parts, and take up less room than a parallelogram steering system. They take the place of the: -Idler Arm -Pitman Arm -Center link -Steering gear box -Note: they are also most common on unibody vehicles. However, there are some full-frame vehicles that use rack and pinion steering. -Rack and Pinion Steering Gear – a common rack and pinion assembly includes the steering pinion gear and the steering rack. The pinion gear is connected to the steering shaft and has grooves that fit into teeth on the steering rack. It moves the rack right or left based on the rotation of the steering shaft and pinion gear. The steering rack is a rod with teeth on one side. It meshes with grooves on the pinion gear and moves laterally based on pinion gear rotation. The steering rack also has tie rods on each end that connect to the steering knuckle -Other Rack and Pinion Steering Parts – other rack and pinion parts include tie rods (both inner and outer), bushings, mounting brackets, bellows boots, and boot clamps -Tie Rods – tie rods connect to the end of the steering rack with an internally or externally threaded inner toe rod. Tie rods also have a threaded end for installation onto the tie rod end. The function and appearance is very similar to the tie rods used on a parallelogram steering system -Rack and Pinion Steering System Operation – on a rack and pinion steering system, the rack moves horizontally on bushings inside of a housing. The rack is moved by the pinion gear that fits into the teeth of the rack. The pinion gear is connected to the steering column shaft, which turns with the steering wheel. When the steering wheel is turned, the pinion rotation moves the rack laterally. The rack moves the inner and outer tie rods. The outer tie rod ends are connected to the steering arm, which are usually part of the knuckle. Steering Column Systems -Steering Column – steering columns are designed to receive input from the steering wheel and transfer the steering action from the column to the rack and pinion or parallelogram steering gear. Steering columns and shafts are also designed to collapse upon impact with the driver or if there is any rearward movement of the steering gear. The column may also house a variety of switches, controls, and the tilt/telescopic features if equipped. Note: Some steering columns may have pyrotechnic charges to promote collapse of the column in certain collision situations. -Steering Column Parts – the steering wheel is attached to the top portion of the steering column and houses the driver airbag module. It may also include controls for the cruise control, radio, and other systems. The clock spring, providing electrical connections for the airbag and other steering wheel mounted controls, is behind the steering wheel, and may also contain the steering angle sensor. Some models may be equipped with a theft deterrent steering column lock system. Steering column parts include but are not limited to: -The steering wheel -The steering column jacket -Steering shafts -Universal joints (U-joints) -Brackets -Upper Steering Column Parts – upper steering column parts typically include the: -Steering column housing, shaft, and bearings -Column position controls -Turn signal switch/lighting controls -Windshield wiper/washer switch -Clock spring -Steering angle sensor -Other controls -Ignition lock cylinder -Note: Lock cylinders may have tamper-resistant fasteners with heads that twist off during installation. A slot may have to be cut into the bolt head to remove these fasteners Steering Power Assist Systems -Power Steering Purpose – power steering systems reduce the effort that is required by the driver to turn the steering wheel. Power steering systems may be: -Conventional-type power steering systems, which use hydraulic fluid to provide steering assist -Electronic-type power steering systems, which use an electric motor that is mounted to the rack assembly or column to provide steering assist -Power Steering Parts – parts of a conventional power steering system include the: -Power steering hydraulic pump -Power steering hoses -Power steering belt -Power steering fluid reservoir -Spool valve -Torsion bar -Steering rack -Pinion gear -Hydraulic Power Steering Parts – parts of a typical hydraulic power steering system include the power steering pump, fluid reservoir, fluid lines and hoses, and fluid cooler. Power steering pumps may be either belt-driven or driven by electric motors. Electrically driven hydraulic power steering may be called electro-hydraulic power steering. Power steering coolers are typically hard lines that route the fluid in a back-and-forth pattern. The coolers are typically located in an area where there is good airflow, such as in front of the radiator or lower front crossmember -Electronically-Controlled Steering – types of electronically-controlled steering include: -Variable-assist hydraulic power steering -Variable gear ratio steering -Electro-hydraulic power steering -Electric-assist power steering -Electric steer or steer-by-wire -Variable-Assist Hydraulic Power Steering – at low speeds, variable-assist power steering systems provide more steering assist to create minimal steering effort for easy turning. Electronically controlled variable-assist hydraulic power steering system parts include the parts of a typical hydraulic power steering system. These systems may have a fluid control valve or solenoid. Depending on system design, the fluid control valve can be located at the power steering pump or the steering gear. The system may have additional sensors and parts, and may be controlled by the powertrain control module, or another module. -Variable Gear Ratio Steering – variable gear ratio steering (VGRS) is not common, but may be available on some typically high-end sport or luxury vehicles. VGRS is able to vary the steering wheel turn angle to actual wheel steer response rate through the use of a special mechanism in the steering shaft or gear - Left is Low Ratio (Quick) /Vehicle speed low. Right is High Ratio (slow) /Vehicle speed high -Electro-Hydraulic Power Steering – the main parts of an electro-hydraulic power steering system include the electric motor and hydraulic pump assembly. These are typically one-piece integral units. Depending on the vehicle, these may be located in the front of the vehicle, vulnerable to collision damage. Parts include the electronic control module and inpurt sensors. The control module may be disintegrated into the pump and motor assembly. Typical input sensors include vehicle speed and electric motor temperature. Main parts also include a conventional power steering gear assembly. -Electric-Assist Power Steering – parts of an electric-assist power steering system include an electric motor mounted to either the steering column or steering gear. These systems use an electric motor instead of hydraulics to provide steering assist. Electric-assist power steering is typically a variable-assist design and uses an electronic control module to control the amount of steering assist provided -Electric Steer or Steer-by-Wire – electric steer or steer-by-wire systems use an electric motor, instead of a mechanical shaft, to turn the wheels. Electric steer is typically used for the rear steering of four-wheel steering systems. With steer-by-wire, there is no mechanical connection between the steering column and steering gear. A variety of designs were used on early versions of rear or four-wheel steering systems for sports and performance vehicles in the late 1980s and early 1990s. some systems were totally mechanical, with a steering shaft controlling a rear steering gear, while others used hydraulics to turn the rear wheels, with or without electronic control Steering and Suspension Operation (2/3) Suspension System Operation Front Suspension System -Front Suspension System Description – vehicle suspension systems are designed to support the vehicle, keep the tires in contact with the road surface, provide directional control of the vehicle, maintain alignment angles, and provide ride quality. Suspension systems found on vehicles include: -MacPherson strut -Modified strut -Short-long arm (SLA) -Double wishbone -Multi-link -Solid axle -Twin I-beam -Note: The Twin I-beam suspension was popular on Ford trucks for many years and utilized two separate front axle beams -Top left – MacPherson Strut -Top right – Double Wishbone -Bottom left – Multi-Link -Bottom right – Short-Long Arm (SLA) -MacPherson Strut – a strut style suspension utilizes a strut with a coil spring to support the weight of the vehicle and maintain wheel position. A strut assembly consists of a strut hosing with a strut rod, upper mount/bearing, and spring. Additional parts include the steering knuckle, hub and bearing assembly, lower control arm with ball joint, and stabilizer bar and links (if equipped). The strut mount attaches to the top of the strut rod and holds the coil spring in position. The strut mount also secures the strut assembly to the vehicle. Note: the strut also acts as a ride damper or shock absorber. -MacPherson Strut, continued – the coil spring mounts between the strut and strut mount. The steering knuckle is typically a cast aluminum or cast steel part. The steering knuckle attaches to both the strut and the lower control arm, and sometimes the steering linkage. The steering knuckle also attaches to the hub, bearing, or spindle. The lower control arm attaches to the engine cradle or vehicle frame. The lower control arm positions the wheel at the bottom. The lower ball joint connects the lower control arm and steering knuckle. The ball joint allows movement when steering left and right, along with movement when the wheel moves up and down -Modified Strut – a modified strut suspension system is similar to a MacPherson strut system in design. This type of strut has the coil spring located between the lower control arm and frame or crossmember, instead of on the strut housing. The spring, lower control arm, and ball joint support the vehicles weight. The lower control arm and upper strut mount maintain wheel position -Short-Long Arm – parts of an SLA suspension include the: -Steering knuckle -Hub and bearing, or spindles and bearings -Upper and lower control arms -Ball joints -Coil springs (or torsion bars on some vehicles) -Shock absorbers -Stabilizer bar and links (if equipped) – this may be referred to as a “sway bar” in some service information. -Note: the steering knuckle may also be referred to as the spindle assembly -Double Wishbone – a double wishbone front suspension is a modified SLA design. This suspension features upper and lower control arms (wishbones) to position the wheel, the steering knuckle is taller than on a typical SLA suspension. This suspension uses a fixed position strut with coil spring that typically has a damper fork on the bottom to support the vehicle’s weight. The damper fork connects the strut to the lower control arm and allows the axle shaft to pass through its center. Double wishbone suspensions may have a radius arm attached to the lower control arm for positioning the lower ball joint at the correct position. Note: the strut assembly does not control wheel position on the double wishbone suspension -Multi-Link – a multi-link suspension is similar in design and function to a double-wishbone suspension, but instead of using a single upper and lower control arm, this system typically uses two upper and lower control arms. Each arm has a ball joint in the end where it connects to the steering knuckle. Multi-link suspensions use a fixed position strut or coil-over shock for suspension control. Only one of the lower arms is weight bearing, or has the strut attached to it. Note: Multi-link suspension may use three or more control links/arms to control wheel position -Solid Axle – parts of a typical solid-axle front suspension include the axle housing, axle shafts, springs, shock absorbers, control arms, hub and bearing assemblies; stabilizer bar and links (if equipped), and steering knuckles. The steering knuckles are typically attached to the axle housing with ball joints, but may use bushed kingpins, or spindle bolts that provide the pivot points for the front wheels to turn. Note: Heavy trucks typically use a solid front axle beam Rear Suspension System -Rear Suspension System Description – rear suspension systems may either be a solid axle design or an independent design. Solid axles may be drive axles on rear-wheel drive and four-wheel drive vehicles or trailing axles on front-wheel drive vehicles. An independent rear suspension is used to improve the ride and handling of a vehicle. Independent rear suspensions may be found on front- and rear-wheel drive vehicles as well as four-wheel drive vehicles. They may be either a strut or an SLA design -Solid Drive Axle – parts of a typical solid drive axle rear suspension include the axle housing, ring and pinion gears and differential, axle shafts, bearings, springs, shock absorbers, and stabilizer bar and links, if equipped. The wheel bearings are typically located in the end of the axle housing tube. Axles with leaf springs usually have U bolts securing the axle to the springs, bushings in the front and rear spring eyes, a mounting bracket in the front, and rear mounting shackles. Axles with coil springs use trailing or control arms with bushings at the mounting points, and usually have a panhard rod/track bar to keep the axle centered -Solid Trailing Axle – parts of a typical solid trailing axle rear suspension include the axle tube (or beam), springs, shock absorbers, trailing arms on coil spring designs, hub and bearing assemblies or spindles and bearings, and stabilizer bar and links, if equipped. Springs may be either coil or leaf design, with coil springs being the most common. Trailing arms have bushings where they connect to the axle housing and chassis. Some designs may have the trailing arms built into the axle housing -Independent Strut Style – parts of a typical strut-style independent rear suspension system include control arms, knuckles, strut assemblies – which include the coil springs, stabilizer bar and links (if equipped), tie rods and tie rod ends, and radius rods or trailing arms. These systems have adjustable links for adjusting the rear toe. Tie rods may be adjustable or solid rods that adjust with cams where they attach to the chassis. Radius rods or trailing arms may be used for vehicles that have a single bar lower control arm. The radius rod or trailing arm is used to maintain the wheel position for the proper wheelbase. The independent strut rear suspension is typically found on front-wheel drive vehicles -Independent SLA Style – parts of a typical SLA-style independent rear suspension system include the upper and lower control arms, ball joints, knuckles, springs, shock absorbers, stabilizer bar and links (if equipped), and tie rod and tie rod ends. Control arms have bushings where they are attached to the chassis. Springs may be either coil or leaf, with coil being the most commonly used. Steering and Suspension Operation (3/3) Ride Control Ride Height Control Parts and Description -Electronically Controlled Suspension Identification – the presence of electronically controlled suspension systems is typically not identifiable by emblems or other highly visible labeling on the vehicle. -Part identification – perform a thorough visual inspection of the suspension system. Look for wiring connected to suspension parts, such as shock absorbers or struts. Look for the presence of air or hydraulic fluid lines to the shock absorbers, struts, or springs. Check for the presence of a malfunction indicator lamp (MIL) for an electronic suspension system when the ignition is first turned ON. Look for switches on the dash or console for manual control of electronic suspension systems. Systems may have an On/Off switch, a switch for sport or comfort damper settings, or a switch for control of vehicle height. Visually identify parts that would indicate the presence of specific electronic or electronic/hydraulic systems -Option Labels – the vehicle option label provides useful information for system identification. Many repair shops and dealership parts departments can decode the option label to determine if an electronically controlled suspension system is present on the vehicle. A VIN-drive parts ordering system may also be used to determine if the vehicle is equipped with an electronically controlled suspension systems -Computer-Controlled Ride Height – computer-controlled ride height systems are one type of electronically-controlled suspension system. These systems are sometimes called level-ride or automatic load leveling systems. Computer-controlled ride height systems may be on the rear of the vehicle only, or the system may be on all four corners of the vehicle. Computer-controlled ride height systems may be air systems. The ride height may be adjusted using air shock absorbers or the vehicle may be equipped with air springs. These systems may also be designed to use a hydraulic system that controls the ride height adjustment -Left- Control Module. Right – Electronically-Controlled Ride Height System -Air Shock Absorber Height Control Systems – the simplest type of height control system is the air shock absorber system, which only controls the height at the rear of the vehicle. These systems typically include rear air shock absorbers which do not act as springs for the vehicle, but rather are used to assist the springs in holding the vehicle level with heavy loads. -Parts – height control systems include an air compressor with a dryer to remove moisture from the air. These systems may use air lines from the compressor to the shock absorbers. An exhaust valve allows air to be removed from the shock absorbers. The exhaust valve is typically built into the air compressor. These systems include height sensors that monitor the ride height of the vehicle. Some rear-only air shock absorber systems have a combination height sensor and control module assembly -Operation – height control systems that use a rear air shock absorber control the ride height by either adding or removing air from the shock absorber air chamber. These systems are controlled by the rear height sensor and control module. The height sensor determines rear ride height and either instructs the air compressor to run or the exhaust valve to open. Typically, these systems have delayed activation to avoid having the compressor run in response to temporary changes in ride height -Hydraulic Height Control Systems – hydraulic height control systems have hydro-pneumatic cylinders in place of the conventional shock absorbers or struts. These systems use the hydro-pneumatic cylinders to control both the ride height and suspension damping force. Hydro-pneumatic cylinders work in series with the vehicle springs. The hydraulic cylinders are used to work with the conventional springs and provide additional and adjustable spring rate and ride height to the vehicle. -Parts – the basic parts of a hydraulic height control system typically include a hydraulic fluid pump, fluid pressure accumulator, control valves or actuators, hydraulic cylinders, input sensors, a control module, switches, and other basic electrical circuit parts -Operation – hydraulic height control systems have accumulators that store hydraulic fluid in one chamber, separated from high pressure gas in another chamber by a rubber bladder. The system may have a front and rear accumulator or separate accumulators for each corner of the suspension. Control valves control the flow of hydraulic fluid between the accumulator and hydraulic cylinder. When the control module calls for increased ride height at a corner, the control valve opens a valve that allows fluid to flow into the hydraulic cylinder and lift the vehicle. Hydraulic fluid is added and removed from the hydraulic cylinders at each corner of the vehicle to either raise or lower ride height Ride Damper Control Parts and Operation -Computer-Controlled Variable Shock Absorber Damping – another type of electronically controlled suspension is computer-controlled variable shock absorber damping. Variable shock absorber damping may be controlled mechanically by varying the orifice size for the shock absorber fluid. Damping may also be controlled magnetically by varying the viscosity of the shock absorber fluid -Semi-Active Suspensions – semi-active suspension systems typically consist of computer-controlled variable dampers that respond to up-and-down body motion inputs to read the road surface. These systems react to the first bounce or suspension deflection to control the second bounce or deflection. They are not active, but rather reactive, semi-active systems do not directly control suspension deflection; they indirectly control it by altering the firmness of the shock absorber damping -Damper Controls – control of variable rate dampers is handled by a control module, which sends an output signal to a solenoid valve located inside the shock absorber body, or in a damping control unit located outside the shock absorber body. -Internal Valve Damper Control – the operation of computer-controlled suspension dampers may be electrically controlled by a solenoid or stepper motor. These use internal actuators or valves located in the damper body or piston to control the flow of the fluid in the shock absorber. Valves are opened or closed to vary the opening size and resistance to fluid flow inside the shock absorber. More resistance to flow produces a firmer suspension damping force and less resistance produces a softer damping force. -External Valve Damper Control – the solenoid or stepper motor may be located in external damping valves on some systems. External damping units are used to allow for more valves than would fit internally in the shock absorber body. The additional valves allow a greater degree of tuning flexibility due to the increase in the number of damping force settings -Magnetic Damper Control - magnetically-controlled variable damper systems have constant shock absorber valving with a variable viscosity fluid. These systems are less complicated and have fewer parts than valve-based variable dampers. The damping force firmness is controlled by varying the viscosity of the fluid inside the shock absorber, instead of varying the opening size that the fluid is forced through -Magnetic Damper Fluid – magnetic damper systems use a special fluid to control the damping force firmness. The fluid has special randomly suspended magnetic particles. In the presence of a magnetic field, the particles align themselves with the magnetic field lines and each other. This raises the viscosity of the fluid. The fluid has an unlimited range of viscosity depending on the strength of the magnetic field in which it is placed. It can go from a fluid-like state when no magnetic field is present, to an almost plastic-like state in the presence of a strong magnetic field. The magnetic field is produced by an electromagnet located on the piston of the damper -Top is off. Bottom is on with magnetic field lines going thru -Combination System – vehicles with electronically controlled suspensions may have combination systems. Combination systems have computer control of both ride height and shock absorber damping. These may have air springs and separate computer-controlled variable dampers. Combination systems may use computer-controlled dampers to adjust both the ride height and handling characteristics of the vehicle. Dampers in these systems may be hydraulic struts with air bladders built in for springs or may be totally hydraulic for both suspension damping and ride height -Active Stabilizer Bars – conventional stabilizer bars (anti sway bar/roll bar) help reduce body roll when cornering by connecting the left and right suspension together with a torsion bar and end links that transfer movement of the suspension on one side to the other, resisting body roll; this can result in a harsh ride condition. Active stabilizer bars allow for high levels of body roll control and suspension handling while using softer springs and dampers for increased ride comfort. Note: Off road vehicles may use a special stabilizer bar with an actuator that can decouple the two ends, allowing for greater suspension travel -Parts – the basic parts of an active stabilizer bar system include a hydraulic fluid pump and reservoir, control module, control valves, high pressure hydraulic fluid lines, lateral acceleration sensors, hydraulic motors or actuators, and stabilizer bars. Each axle may have a stabilizer bar that is made of two parts or it may have a solid bar that is connected to the suspension on one side with a variable hydraulic linear actuator -Operation – when a vehicle that is equipped with active stabilizer bars goes around a corner or curve, the lateral acceleration or yaw rate sensors detect the body roll and sends a signal to the control module. The control module acts on the valve blocks to supply pressurized hydraulic fluid to the correct size of the oscillating motor or hydraulic actuator. The oscillating motor, or actuator, then twists the stabilizer bar halves in opposite directions to counteract the roll of the vehicle body over the suspension Structural Damage Analysis – Structures (1/3) Vehicle Structures Types of Vehicle Construction -Types of Frames – common vehicle structures include the unibody structure, space frame, and body-over-frame -Unibody – a unibody structure has a single structure built by attaching multiple parts of sheet metal. Attachment methods include spot welds, laser welds, rivets, adhesives, or a combination of methods. The unibody frame has exterior welded-on body panels, such as roofs and quarter panels, included in the overall structure. The drivetrain, steering, and suspension parts are mounted directly to the body structure. A unibody structure depends on correct structural alignment for proper steering and suspension alignment. This frame type may be used for cars, sport-utility vehicles, and trucks -Space Frame – space frame vehicles are similar to unibody vehicles, but have a lighter-weight design. Space frame vehicles use lightweight metal or a metal and composite combination, so they are less dependent on the outer body panels for strength. Note: Space frames are similar to the inner structures commonly found in race cars -Body-Over-Frame – body-over-frame vehicles, which are often referred to as full-frame vehicles, have a frame independent of the unitized structure. Two main types of frames include perimeter and ladder designs. Ladder frames are more common on recreational vehicles (RVs), busses, and commercial trucks. Body-over-frame vehicles have a separate unitized structure bolted to the frame. It uses the same energy management characteristics that are used for unibody vehicles. These vehicles have the engine, drivetrain, and steering and suspension parts bolted to the frame -Modern Full-Frame Characteristics – modern pickup truck and SUV frame designs vary, depending on the vehicle. Features of modern frame designs include: -A combination of characteristics from both ladder-type and perimeter-type frame designs -Both open C-channel and box-type rails -Hydroformed rails. Box-type and tubular hydroformed rails are flangeless, one-piece structures formed from a metal tube. -Welded or riveted mounting brackets -Crossmembers that are welded or riveted to the frame -Collapse zones -Torque boxes -Note: Many pickup trucks and SUVs have modern frames with a lower center of gravity for better handling and a more car-like ride -Top is Open C-Channel. Bottom is Box-Type Frame -Aluminum Unibody Frame – there are many advantages to using aluminum vs. steel, with weight savings being a primary advantage. Vehicle makers may reduce the weight of a vehicle structure by approximately 30% when using an aluminum frame. The three aluminum body design concepts used today include: extrusion-intensive frame structures, space frames, and unibody structures. Aluminum structures will typically include extruded parts in several locations that have limited repairability due to restricted access to the inside of the part. Some common areas for these extruded parts include: -Rocker panels -Roof rails -Pillars -Frame rails -Tie bars The Collision -Basic Vehicle Design – to determine how the vehicle should be repaired, it is helpful to understand how the vehicle is constructed. Each vehicle is designed with three distinct sections: Front, Rear, Center. Each section has a specific function in the event of a collision. The front and rear structures are designed to collapse up to a specific point and transfer energy to the opposite end of the vehicle. This controlled deceleration of the vehicle helps absorb collision energy, as well as re-route the collision energy around the center section -Passenger Compartment Design (Center Section) – unlike the front and rear sections of the vehicle, the center section or passenger compartment: -Is not designed to collapse -Has collision energy transferred around it -Remains intact and provides a safe space for the vehicle occupants -Keeps occupants inside the vehicle during the collision -Collision Energy – collision energy starts at the point of impact on the vehicle. The absorption and transfer of collision energy is done using several techniques. Crush zones which are specific designs in the structural components used to collapse or bend in a controlled manner absorb the collision energy. Different strengths of steel, may also be used to either absorb or transfer the collision energy, as well as different thicknesses of material, which may vary within a part depending on design. Finally, reinforcements transfer collision energy to other areas of the vehicle -Crush Zones – crush zones are designed into the vehicle to absorb collision energy. Crush zones may be holes, dimples, or slots stamped into a part. These zones are made by using tailor-welded blanks, tailor-rolled blanks, and/or reinforcements. Crush zones use different types of steel strength and thicknesses. These zones may have formed ribs or stamped areas across the width of the part – these may also be called convolutions. The crush zone kick-up or offset areas bend during a collision and redirect collision energy. A kick-up or offset may be designed to direct the engine and transmission under the passenger compartment, rather than into it, during a collision -Importance of Proper Repair – during the damage analysis process, the estimator/appraiser must determine the appropriate repair methods to ensure the collision characteristics are restored to pre-accident integrity. This will make sure the structure reacts as designed by the vehicle maker in a subsequent collision. Using specific materials and part design, automotive engineers have designed the vehicle to collapse in a predictable manner to protect those inside the passenger compartment. Changing a part design or repairing parts that should not be repaired can affect the original design, which can alter the collision energy management of the vehicle. Note: It is important to note that the repairer and/or insurer may be liable for any personal injury or property damage caused by improper repairs Analyzing Vehicle Damage -Direct Damage – when analyzing vehicle damage, it is helpful to determine the area of direct damage. Direct damage is the point of impact where the vehicle has the most obvious damage. It is here where damage analysis generally begins. Direct damage may also be referred to as primary damage or initial impact -Mass Inertia Damage – mass inertia damage is caused by unrestrained object in the vehicle, or parts of the vehicle itself, that continue momentum after the vehicle has been stopped by a collision. This can damage both the interior and exterior of the vehicle -Examples of Mass Inertia Damage – types of damage that can be caused by mass inertia include a damaged pickup bed or trunk from unrestrained items, a bent motor mount, and a cracked composite radiator core support from a rear impact. Other examples include a collapsed steering column from the driver impacting the steering wheel, damage to seat frames, center consoles, door trim panels, and cracked windshields -Indirect Damage – indirect damage is essentially the same as mass inertia damage. Indirect damage: -Is caused by the force of the collision as it moves through the vehicle -Occurs away from the point of impact -Can be found anywhere on the vehicle, which makes it difficult to locate -May not be evident without close inspection -May be identified by accurate measuring -Can include mechanical parts, such as wheel bearing damage caused by an impact to a wheel -May also include bent engine mount brackets, which are considered a type of indirect damage -Indirect Damage on Late Model Vehicles – indirect damage today looks different from indirect damage on older model vehicles. Stronger steels transfer more collision energy around the passenger compartment. There may be no visible panel gap misalignment, but still be indirect damage away from the direct impact area. Measuring may be the only way to verify indirect damage due to collision energy transfer. A buckle in the roof used to be a very common indicator of structural damage, but this is no longer the case. The solid structure of the center section often prevents this from happening; however, collision energy may still have radiated to the opposite end of the vehicle. New body designs change the way a vehicle is inspected -Secondary Damage – secondary damage is damage that resulted away from the initial impact during a second impact with another object. Secondary damage includes both direct and indirect damage. Depending on the collision, there may be multiple locations of damage that are secondary damage. For example, a vehicle may hit a barrier, spin, and hit another barrier or oncoming vehicle. This can present unique challenges when trying to determine the point of initial impact, since there may be several areas that show direct damage. Customer interviews can be helpful in determining how a collision occurred -Impact Angles and Damage Analysis – understanding the impact angles and how energy travels through the damaged vehicle is an essential part of damage analysis -What are Impact Angles? – when analyzing damage to a vehicle, it is important to understand the impact angle. These angles include: -Straight-on front -Straight-on rear -Offset front or rear, which is just a portion of the front or rear of the vehicle -Rollover -Side -Note: Another type of impact angle is when an object directly hits the unibody. This is not as evident, as most of the damage will be underneath the vehicle -Damage Analysis Considerations – determining the direction of the impact is helpful for a thorough analysis. Understanding how energy traveled through the vehicle structure helps the appraiser/estimator identify likely secondary or indirect damage. It is necessary to look for where the damage was initiated, then try to follow the path the energy likely traveled through the vehicle -Examining Impact Angles – examining the impact angle of vehicles is key to understanding how energy traveled through the vehicle: each impact angle can affect how damage is transferred into the vehicle structure; for example, a side impact, due to the very strong side structure, may result in the front and rear swaying to the side of the collision, giving the vehicle a banana shape; with late model vehicles, a banana shape generally requires severe impact forces due to the reinforcement of the center section; another example is when a vehicle has an offset front-end collision – this type of damage may cause the front end to sway toward one side of the vehicle; depending on the speed of the collision, the energy -Types of Damage Conditions – collision impacts result in specific damage conditions to the vehicle structure. The extent or number of conditions created in the vehicle structure depends on the angle and severity of the collision. Types of damage conditions include diamond, twist, sag, mash, and side sway. -Diamond – the diamond condition is often created by an offset collision impact where one side of the vehicle is moved forward or rearward of the opposite side. It causes the center section to be out of square, taking on a diamond-like appearance. Diamond is commonly associated with full-frame vehicles, but it is starting to be found on unibody vehicles as increased use of reinforcements and ultra-high-strength steel (UHSS) become standard in vehicle construction. For example, diamond may occur from a direct impact to the rocker panel. If there is a diamond in a unibody vehicle, it is generally accompanied by a dent or wrinkle in the floor pan. -Twist – a twist occurs when the center section of a vehicle is out of level. Either one or both ends are out of level with each other. A twist is a height problem, where a portion of the vehicle center section is higher or lower than the opposite side. A twist condition may not be evident in the upper body structure; however, the vehicle may appear as though there is suspension damage. On full-frame vehicles, twists can occur in the frame and/or the unitized structure. A twist can occur from colliding with a curb or ditch at high speed, becoming airborne at one point, or being involved in a rear impact. Note: It is important for technicians to repair the twist condition before it is anchored for pulling. Not making this repair ahead of time can lock the twist condition into the vehicle -Grey is undamaged. Tan is damaged -Sag – sag is a condition where the front or rear sections of the vehicle or the cowl have height measurements that are out of specification. It is generally the result of a straight-on collision. Sag is indicated by body panels having inconsistent panel gaps from top to bottom. This happens when the cowl drops down in a front-end collision. Due to the stronger center sections, this condition is not as common as it was on older models -Grey undamaged. Tan damaged -Mash – mash is also called collapse or short rail, and is a condition where any section or frame member is shorter than factory specification. Mash is common on front and rear rails from front and rear impacts. Damage may be more visible in the front and rear section of the vehicle compared to the center section. For example, collapse of the rails may lead to distortions or buckles in panels, such as fenders, hoods, and quarter panels -Side Sway – sway, or side sway, occurs when collision energy forces a part of the vehicle to one side or the other. This condition is a width misalignment and generally occurs to the front or rear section of the vehicle. Side sway may be evident by wide gaps on one side of the vehicle and narrow gaps on the opposite side. Direct impact would generally take place on the side of the vehicle. When analyzing damage, an indication of side sway is evidence of buckling on the inside of the driver side rail and buckling on the outside of the passenger side rail -Additional Unitized Structure Visual Damage Indicators – additional visual damage indicators are used to check the unitized structure -Wheel Position – check the position of the wheel in the wheelhouse. The most obvious assumption is that there is suspension damage; however, if this is not visible, it is likely that there is damage to the suspension mounting areas that are part of the vehicle structure -Cracked Seam Sealer or Paint – check for cracked seam sealers or paint. This may require lifting the carpeting or raising the vehicle to view the floor pan or trunk floor. Cracked seam sealer may be an indication of inner structure damage -Closure Panel Operation – check for improper closure panel operation. If the door, hood, or deck lid binds, drops, or stickers when opening, it may be an indication of larger structural damage -Cracked Windshield – a cracked windshield is an indicator that there is stress in the upper body structure that caused the glass to crack -Buckled Exterior Panels – while dented panels are often a result of a direct impact, structure misalignment will also cause panels to buckle -Using Visual Cues – when looking at visual cues regarding structural damage, note that these should only be used as guides. They should never be used as the only method to determine structural damage. However, they can be used as evidence that structure three-dimensional measuring must be done. In most instances, measuring may be the only practical method to determine if structural damage exists. The visual indicators simply show that the vehicle should be measured. Most estimators and auto physical damage appraisers use visual cues to identify if measuring is required. It is rare to do field measurements. Most structural misalignment problems are generally evidence. However, there are situations when damage is very subtle, and only measuring will identify a structural problem Structural Damage Analysis – Structures (2/3) Measuring for Damage Analysis Point-to-Point Measurements -Types of Measurements – types of measurements used for vehicle repair include point-to-point and three-dimensional. Point-to-point measurements are used for damage analysis only, and are not a substitute for three-dimensional measuring. Three-dimensional measuring is required for any type of structural repair and can be used for damage analysis as well -Measuring for Damage Analysis – measuring for damage analysis helps: -Locate indirect and hidden damage -Determine a repair plan to restore vehicle safety, performance, and appearance -Identify suspension damage -Note: The estimate, or damage report, is generally not considered complete until a complete and thorough damage analysis is done that includes measuring the vehicle structure -Measurements within Normal Tolerance – when making measurements or looking at measurement results, compare the measurements with the visual damage. Determine if the measurements match the visible damages and direction of impact. Try to determine how far the damage radiates into the vehicle. In other words, measure until you find measurements within normal tolerance -Point-to-Point Measuring – point-to-point measurements can be taken with a tape measure or tram gauge. Tape measures must have a metric scale, since most dimension sheets list dimensions in metric measurements. When making the measurements, make sure the tape measure lays flat between the points being measured. Bends or twists will give inaccurate readings. A tram gauge is a telescoping measuring device with adjustable pointers on each end. It is used for making point-to-point measurements. Some tram gauges may require a tape measure to measure between the pointers. This is used for tram gauges that do not have a built-in measuring device. Tram gauges are available in different sizes and may be digital or equipped with a built-in tape measure. Most tram gauges have metric measurements printed on the bar and pointers -Making Point-to-Point Measurements – point-to-point measurements for holes of the same size are made either edge-to-edge or center-to-center. If measuring from fasteners, typically measurements will be made center-to-center, measuring to the center of each bolt head -Measuring for Structural Damage – common point-to-point measurements used to perform quick checks for structural damage include: -Lower ball joint to frame -Underhood crosscheck -Underbody crosscheck -Door and deck lid openings -Note: Point-to-point measurements can also be comparative measurements from one side of the vehicle to the other. Point-to-point measurements should not be a substitute for three-dimensional measurements Three-Dimensional Measuring -Three-Dimensional Measuring Equipment – there are several types of three-dimensional measuring systems used to measure a vehicle and return it to proper dimensions. Each system uses a specific method for providing measurement readings to the technician. Some of these systems include: -Universal mechanical or laser -Fixture measuring systems – this is not commonly used for damage analysis, as it requires the vehicle to be mounted to a bench -Computerized measuring systems -Three-Dimensional Planes – measuring systems must read all three dimensions to verify a specific point on a vehicle. These dimensions include height, width, and length. Three-dimensional measuring equipment may be installed in the estimating bay to assist in writing accurate damage reports. This type of equipment generally does not require anchoring the vehicle in place. Measuring systems use datum, centerline, and zero planes as vehicle reference points -Datum Plane (Height) – a datum plane is an imaginary surface or plane positioned beneath the vehicle that is parallel to the vehicle underbody. It is used by measuring systems as a starting point from which height is measured to various reference points on the vehicle. The datum plane distance from the bottom of the vehicle varies according to the maker of the measuring system or vehicle makers dimension guide -Centerline Plane (Width) – centerline plane is: -An imaginary plane that cuts the vehicle in half from the floor to the roof lengthwise, front to rear -Used by measuring systems as a starting point for width measurements -Used to establish a width position for vehicle reference points -Zero Plane (Length) – zero plane is used by measuring systems as a starting point from which length is measured. This is an imaginary plane that extends across the width of the vehicle. The zero plane is projected at different locations depending on the maker of the dimension guide. The zero plane should not be in an area that has been damaged. If the dimension guide shows the zero plane in an area that has been damaged, such as the front torque box area, the zero plane can be moved to the rear torque box area. The listed measurements in the dimension guide, however, must be adjusted accordingly -Three-Dimensional Measuring Points – points used for measuring the vehicle are control and reference points. These points: -May be the same points used during vehicle assembly -Are used for damage analysis -Include bolts, slots, holes, formed and pierced parts, and divots -Generally require starting with three known good points to set up the measuring system -Three-Dimensional Suspension Measurements – similar to the point-to-point measurements taken from the lower pivot point, three-dimensional measurements are made from the vehicle centerline to verify proper positioning of the suspension. They can help determine if the lower rails, strut towers, suspension parts, or engine cradles are out of alignment -Three-Dimensional Suspension Measurements, continued – one suspension measurement that is used is called steering axis inclination (SAI). These points can be verified by measuring the distance from the centerline to the upper pivot point, at the top of the strut tower, and the lower pivot point at the lower ball joint. When the upper and lower pivot points are at specification, the SAI angle will be correct. The purpose of the SAI is for directional control of the vehicle. If the angle is different from side to side, the vehicle may pull. SAI is measured with true vertical. An engine cradle that has moved or been damaged may cause an incorrect SAI -Three-Dimensional Suspension Measurements, continued – when making three-dimensional measurements, technicians start with the center section of the vehicle. This part of the vehicle is essentially the foundation of measuring, and provides a reference for all other measurements. There are instances when the center section is damaged; however, only three good points are needed to establish a good foundation -Dimension Resources – specific points used to make three-dimensional measurements are provided by: -Measuring equipment makers -Vehicle makers -Note: Estimating guides and vehicle makers also provide quick point-to-point measurements. Measurements, whether three-dimensional or point-to-point, are almost exclusively provided in millimeters -Vehicle Repair Tolerance – during vehicle production, most vehicles are built within a certain tolerance. Tolerance: -Is the range that a measurement can vary by and still be acceptable, so the vehicle panels fit and operate properly, and the suspension allows the vehicle to handle properly. This may be as low as zero, or no tolerance, for some vehicle makers -May include variations in dimensions between vehicles of the same make. This is called vehicle build tolerance -Vehicle Repair Tolerance, continued – due to this tolerance, not all vehicle measurements will be identical and may vary by a millimeter or two, during collision repairs, the vehicle must be returned to proper specification. For collision repair purposes, tolerance depends on what is being measured. For example, areas with very low or no tolerance may include non-adjustable door hinges, uniside construction, nonadjustable suspension mounting locations, and airbag sensor mounting locations. Items with more tolerance may include rail measurements. However, in most cases, tolerance will not exceed +/- 3mm -Asymmetrical vs Symmetrical Measurements – most points on a vehicle are in the same location on the left and right side, or symmetrical. Asymmetrical vehicles have: -Structural variances from the left to the right -Reference points in different locations -Note: For example, some vehicles may have strut tower bolts in different positions. Since the strut tower colts are reference points, the measurements may be different even though there is no structure variation between the left and right side of the vehicle -Reading Computerized Measuring Sheets – most three-dimensional measuring systems offer the option of printing out the measuring results. On these particular systems, a computer is required to measure and record. The measuring readouts vary by maker. With most systems, improper measurements may be highlighted in a different color. Some colors may vary, depending on whether the measurement is too long or short, or too high or too low. The measuring print outs note the specific measuring locations and provide the profile and overhead view of the vehicle. The computerized printouts provide complete measurements and an overall picture of the damage. They may also have a negative sign to indicate a short or narrow measurement Structural Damage Analysis – Structures (3/3) General Repair Considerations Part Repairability -Work Hardening – metal is work-hardened each time it is formed, bent, stretched, or compressed. As a part becomes more work-hardened, it becomes more brittle, making it prone to cracking. A metal part is work-hardened, initially when it is formed at the manufacturing plant. However, it is work-hardened further when it is deformed during a collision and straightened during repair -Work Hardening, continued – work hardening changes the original characteristics of the part. This can be an issue if the par tis not repaired properly. A work-hardened part may not reach properly if it is involved in another collision, possibly allowing more intrusion into the passenger compartment. Although the effects of work hardening can be reduced with the use of heat, applications of heat are primarily limited to mild steel -Bent or Kinked Parts – there is a common statement in the collision industry that if a part is bent, it can be straightened, if it is kinked, it must be replaced. -Bent – a bend is a smooth, continuous change in shape, and generally can be repaired without altering the state or shape -Kinked Parts – a kink is defined as a sharp bend with a small radius over a short distance. A part is considered kinked if after straightening, there is a permanent area of deformation that will not return to its original shape without the use of excessive heat. The kinked area has experienced changes in the metal, and may have visible cracks or tears. These changes create permanent damage that cannot be repaired, regardless of the type of repair performed -Stage and Shape – when making a part repair decision, the most important factors to consider are that the metal state and shape must be restored. In other words, both strength and appearance must match the pre-accident integrity of the part. Metal has a molecular grain structure. This structure gives metal its strength and cannot be seen with the naked eye. When metal is damaged, its grain structure is rearranged. This grain structure damage can: -Weaken the part -Cause the part to react differently if involved in another collision -Occur when an area is kinked -Note: The grain structure in kinked areas will likely be irreversibly affected. When an area is kinked, it is likely to have microscopic cracking of the grain structure. Aluminum is especially vulnerable to this, and will often crack during straightening. Some high-strength steel (HSS) and ultra-high-strength steel (UHSS) are typically not repairable regardless of whether the part is kinked or bent. UHSS is almost always replaced if damage, dur to permanent changes in the steel Heating and Sectioning Considerations -Heat issues – HSS and UHSS are altered by the application of heat. Heat makes HSS and UHSS softer, more malleable, or weaker, essentially losing high tensile strength. Heating a part to straighten it is generally not recommended, unless the part is a mild steel part where limited heat application will not affect the integrity of the steel -Vehicle Maker Heat Limit Recommendations – to determine if heat can be applied for stress relieving, refer to the body repair or service manual. Some vehicle makers have specific guidelines for heating steel during repairs. These may include not allowing heat to be used for repairs, such as straightening kinks. The vehicle maker may only allow cold straightening. Some vehicle makers state that HSS should generally not be heated. If heat is allowed, it is generally to be used only as a last resort. This may include using heat when straightening the vehicle back to proper dimensions. If the material cannot be identified, it should be treated as a type of HSS and not be heated -Damage Repair Recommendations – determining how a part needs to be repaired depends on recommendations from the vehicle maker. These recommendations can be found at -Vehicle maker collision repair websites, typically for a normal fee -ALLDATA, which is a subscription website -OEM1Stop, which is a subscription website -I-CAR Repairability Technical Support (RTS) side -Note: Damage removal is generally done by straightening, removing the entire part at factory seams, removing a portion of the part at factory seams, or by sectioning the part -Complete Part Replacement – replacing a complete part at factory seams is common on UHSS parts, though some vehicle makers offer partial replacement of their UHSS parts. Replacement may be done because reinforcements make partial replacement difficulty. Replacements may require additional undamaged part removal. In some instances, complete part removal may be extensive and removal may require disturbing factory seams that create additional corrosion hotspots -Partial Replacement – a portion of a part can be replaced at factory seams, or a new joint can be created away from factory seams. This is called “sectioning”. Many parts of a vehicle are not one piece, but composed of multiple pieces that are joined together. Replacing a portion of a part at factory seams is sometimes recommended. Sectioning does this at an area of the part away from factory seams, creating a new joint. Either of these partial replacement methods requires a recommendation from the vehicle maker, with either a procedure or available partial part. There may also be a recommendation to partially replace a part at factory seams at one location, and section in another location -Partial Replacement, continued – the advantages of partial replacement include that the repair affects a smaller area, there are fewer OEM welds disturbed, less original corrosion protection disturbed, and potentially less disassembly. Laser-welded joints are not considered a good factory seam for partial replacement. Most vehicle makers do not recommend this joint -Determining Partial Replacement Options – when considering whether partial replacement is a viable repair option, determine if a procedure exists to make this type of repair, or if there is a partial part available, such as a portion of an assembly. Also, determine if the partial replacement option removes all of the damage, which joints are recommended, and how corrosion protection will be applied after the joint is complete. -Cutting Access Windows – some repair procedures from vehicle makers have been developed that require cutting access windows into a part to access the opposite side of a part. This is generally done to allow access to a reinforcement for sectioning or to a part so that it can be removed for complete replacement. For example, on some vehicles, access windows in the outer, upper B-pillar are required for removing the reinforcement. A similar method I sused to access the rocker panel reinforcement. Cutting any type of access window is technically considered a sectioning joint, and can be more intrusive since a window has two or more cuts compared to just one in a traditional sectioning joint. Re-welding all these cuts create a larger heat-affect zone, which can be damaging to higher strength steel. It also requires a larger area to be cosmetically finished. For these reasons, this procedure is done only when recommended by the vehicle maker -Other Damage Analysis Inspection items – items to consider when inspecting collision-damaged parts include: -Corrosion that may affect the repair process or indicate previous damage -Previous repairs that may affect how repairs will be made to new damage -Previous repairs are often indicated by plug welds, flange variations, or a thicker finish that requires identification using a film-thickness gauge -If a part was previously repaired, the same repair may not be possible. For example, instead of sectioning in the same location, complete part replacement may be the only option -Other Damage analysis Inspections Items, continued – items to consider when inspecting collision-damaged parts also include damage to the vehicle finish and damage to the suspension or suspension mounting locations. Make sure that the steering wheel is in the straight-ahead position, check the position of the front wheels Steering System Overview (1/3) -Steering System Parts Inspection – it is important for structural and non-structural technicians to identify any damage to steering system parts so the vehicle is returned to the customer in a safe condition. In a visual inspection, inspect for: -Misalignment of the wheel positions in relation to each other -Misalignment of the wheel positions when the steering wheel is centered -Any bent, twisted, or broken parts, parts that have shifted on their mounting locations, and bushing that have moved or are distorted -Damage to system-related wires, connectors, sensors, lines, hoses, and belts -Damage to the vehicle structure at any steering system part mounting location -*Unrelated or wear/service related concerns should be documented as well -Steering Column – steering columns transfer the steering action from the steering wheel to the rack and pinion or parallelogram steering gear. Steering columns are designed to collapse upon impact with the driver and typically contain accessory controls, such as the lighting and windshield wiper controls. Steering column parts include, but are not limited to: -The steering wheel -The steering column jacket -Steering shafts -Universal joints (U-joints_ -Brackets -Steering Wheel Damage Analysis and Inspection – common collision-related damage to the steering wheel includes a cracked or bent steering wheel. Steering wheel damage can also result from airbag deployment. When inspecting the steering wheel, check for the following: -Loose mountings -Steering wheel wobble or runout, which can be an indication of a bent steering shaft -Noise while turning the steering wheel -Abnormal steering effort -A damaged airbag module or cover -Damaged wiring or connectors -Scratches or cuts in the steering wheel -Damage to controls and switches on the steering wheel -Steering Column Shaft – steering column shafts transfer the action of the steering wheel to the steering gear. The steering shaft may be composed of the lower, intermediate, and upper steering shafts -Steering Column Jacket – houses the steering shaft and related parts. Attaches to the vehicle body. May be one or two pieces. * two-piece steering column jackets typically telescope into each other upon impact with the driver. -Universal Joints – U-joints allow the steering shafts to rotate at angles. They may be covered with a plastic shroud or rubber boot. A flexible coupling may be used at the steering gear input. U-joints may be used in two or more locations on the upper and lower steering column. -Upper Steering Column Parts – upper steering column parts may include: -the steering column shaft - lighting controls -the windshield wiper/washer switch -the ignition lock cylinder. -*Some lock cylinders have tamper-resistant fasteners. The tamper-resistant fasteners typically have heads that twist off during installation. To remove the fasteners, a slot may have to be cut into the bolt head. -Additional Steering Column Parts – additional steering column parts include -Springs, seals, bearings, and mounting brackets -The upper and lower shroud or trim cover -* Another important steering column part is the clock spring. The clock spring is located below the steering wheel and provides a continuous electrical connection between the driver airbag system wiring and the airbag module. It may also provide an electrical connection for the horn and other steering wheel mounted controls. Most vehicles will have a steering angle sensor as well. - clock spring is in the center, where the yellow wires are coming out -Steering Column Safety Features – steering columns have a built-in safety feature that absorbs the driver impact by collapsing at a specific point. By collapsing upon impact, injury to the driver may be reduced. Collapsing the steering column also prevents the steering wheel and column from being pushed up toward the driver during a frontal collision. Steering column collapse is managed in two parts: upper and lower. Some steering systems control column collapse by linking the lower section to two or more offset universal joints. The universal joints allow the section to fold upon impact. The U-joints themselves do not collapse. Impact force on the bottom arrow, collapse on the top arrow -Steering Column Capsules – some systems have capsules on the steering column bracket assembly. These are designed to break away during an airbag deployment or driver impact on the steering wheel, allowing the shaft to collapse. During inspection, the capsules must be securely seated in the bracket slots and checked for looseness when pushed or pulled by hand. the yellow area. That clip thing is the steering column capsule -Column Ignition Lock System – some vehicles have a safety feature in the steering column that prevents the steering wheel from being locked when the transmission is in gear and the vehicle may be moving. The steering column electric park lock contains a spring-loaded pin that mechanically prevents the ignition key cylinder from being turned to the LOCK position when the transmission is not in the PARK position. If vehicle power is lost or the transmission is not in the PARK position, the driver will not be able to turn the ignition key to the LOCK position and will not be able to remove the ignition key from the column. -Tilt Steering Columns – tilt steering columns tilt the steering wheel up or down according to the driver’s preference, and have the other end of the upper shaft connected to the lower or intermediate shaft using a U-joint. Some systems tilt at a joint just behind the steering wheel. Others tilt at the U-joint just before the cowl. When the steering wheel tilt lever is released, the spring-loaded locking mechanism is released. The locking mechanism has teeth that fit into a splined collar on the steering column jacket. This type of design is common for vehicles with steering columns that tilt just behind the steering wheel -Power Tilt Steering Column – power tilt steering column systems may have a power tilt mechanism with a memory function built into the tilt operation. If equipped with a memory function, the computer uses a position sensor to determine the location of the column. The column may also have a telescoping feature. -Rack and Pinion Steering System – rack and pinion steering systems are the most common type of steering system for passenger vehicles and trucks up to ½ ton. Rack and pinion systems are lighter weight, have fewer external parts, and take up less room than a parallelogram steering system. A rack and pinion assembly consists of the housing, steering pinion gear, and the steering rack. Other rack and pinion parts include -Tie rods (both inner and outer) -Bushings -Mounting brackets -Bellows boots -Rack and Pinion Inspection – there are several things to check for when you are inspecting a rack and pinion steering system -Rack and Pinion Assembly Inspection – when inspecting the rack and pinion assembly, check for: -Worn or damaged mounting locations and bushing -Visible damage to the housing assembly -Pinion shaft end-play -Damaged tie rod end seals -Damage to lines and hoses -Damaged sensors, connectors, and wiring -Other Assembly Inspection Points – when inspecting the rack and pinion assembly, you should also check for -Wheels not pointing straight ahead when the steering wheel is centered -Steering wheel free-play exceeding ¼ inch -Corrosion or fluid leaks on the assembly -Rack and Pinion Mounting Locations – the rack and pinion assembly may be -Mounted to the front crossmember -Attached to the cowl behind the engine -Attached to the engine cradle -* The steering rack assembly should be level to the vehicle body structure -Pinion Gear – the pinion gear is connected to the steering shaft and has grooves that fit into teeth on the steering rack. It moves the rack right or left based on the rotation of the steering shaft and pinion gear -Steering Rack – the steering rack is a rod with teeth on one side. It meshes with grooves on the pinion gear and moves laterally based on pinion gear rotation. The steering rack also has tie rods on each end that connect to the steering knuckle. -Tie Rods – tie rods connect to the end of the steering rack with an internally or externally threaded inner tie rod. Tie rods also have a threaded end for installation onto the tie rod end. The function and appearance are very similar to the tie rods used on a parallelogram steering system. Tie rod ends are held in place with a lock nut. They have a ball stud that allows lateral and vertical movement and may have a grease zerk. -Ball Sockets – ball sockets are used to connect movable steering parts. For example, ball sockets are used to connect the outer tie rod end with the steering knuckle, or the inner tie rod end with the steering rack. They are used at both ends of a tie rod assembly and allow a swivel motion between parts. Typically, the movable tie rod joint on the outside is called a ball stud, while the tie rod end on the inside is called a ball socket. Ball sockets should not have free play. As this is an indicator of wear or damage -Bellow Boots – bellows boots are a flexible rubber covering over the inner tie rod-to-rack connection. Bellows boots protect the inner ball stud from dirt, dust, water, and various other contaminants. They also retain the lubrication at the joint. If the bellows boots are filled with power steering fluid, that is an indicator the seals on the rack are bad. Rack and Pinion Steering System Operation – on a rack and pinion steering system, the rack slides horizontally on bushings inside of a housing. The rack is moved by the pinion gear that fits into the teeth of the rack. The pinion gear is connected to the steering column shaft, which turns with the steering wheel. When the steering wheel is turned, the pinion rotation moves the rack laterally. The rack moves the inner and outer tie rods. The outer tie rod ends are connected to the steering arms, typically part of the knuckle, which turns the wheels. -Parallelogram System Inspection – when checking the steering system for damage, inspect for the following -Bent, twisted, or broken parts -Noises -Binding -Uneven turning effort -Looseness -Hard steering -Fluid leakage -* Damaged parts should be replaced, not repaired. Never straighten bent steering parts. Straightening may cause safety and part performance issues -Parallelogram Steering System Parts – a parallelogram steering system is most common on heavy duty full-frame vehicles. Parts of a parallelogram steering system include the -Gear box (green) -Sector shaft (orange) -Pitman arm (purple) -Idler arm assembly (blue) -Center link (red) -Tie rods and tie rod ends (yellow) -Steering Gear Box – the steering gear box receives input from the steering column shaft. The rotation of the steering wheel is converted to the lateral movement of the steering linkage. The worm gear, which receives direction from the shaft, has spiral grooves that move a ball nut back and forth. The teeth on the ball nut mesh with the sector shaft gear teeth and move the sector shaft when the worm gear is rotated. Most late model vehicles use gear boxes with recirculating balls. The recirculating balls, which basically function like ball bearings, assist the movement between the ball nut rack and the sector gear. -Pitman Arm – the pitman arm connects the steering gear to the center link. It supports one side of the center link and moves the center link to the right or left. The pitman arm positions the center link at the proper height Center link in the center. Pitman arm on the right -Wear-Type Pitman Arms – a wear-type pitman arm has ball sockets and studs at the outer end. They have studs that fit into the center link opening, as well as a ball and socket that is subject to wear. They may require replacement if the ball stud is loose in the pitman arm. Some pitman arms are equipped with a grease zerk, requiring periodic maintenance. Follow the vehicle maker’s recommendation for the specific type of grease wear type -Non-Wear-Type Pitman Arms – non-wear-type pitman arms have a tapered opening in the outer end. They also have a ball stud in the center link that fits into this tapered opening. Typically, non-wear pitman arms only require replacement if the arm is damaged or bent in a collision. non wear type -Sector Shaft – the sector shaft is part of the steering gear assembly. It is connected directly to the pitman arm and is also known as the pitman shaft. Movement of the sector shaft transfers the steering wheel motion to the horizontal steering system. This sector shaft is twisted at the splines where the pitman arm attaches. circled part is the splines -Idler Arm – the idler arm is connected to the center link with a ball stud. It keeps the center link parallel to the frame mountings. The idler arm support is bolted to the frame on the opposite end of the center link from the pitman arm. Types of idler arms include a -Constant torque-type -Taper-type -Threaded-type -Bushing-type -Center Link – the center link connects the steering gear to the tie rods. It connects to the pitman arm and idler arm to form a parallelogram. The center link provides the proper height for the tie rods, minimizing toe change. A tapered-end-type link has the studs from the pitman arm and idler arm fit into the holes in the ends of the center link. This type of link is considered a non-wear-type link. Some center links have ball studs on the ends that fit into holes in the pitman and idler arms. The ball sockets on the center link may wear. This is considered a wear-type link. Blue is the idler arm, Red is the center link, Purple is the pitman arm -Drag Link System – not all parallelogram systems have idler arms. Some systems use a drag link. The drag link socket is attached to the -Adjusting Tube -Steering Knuckle -* The adjusting tube is positioned between the inner tie rod and drag link socket. This type of systems is typically used only on 2- or 4- wheel drive vehicles with solid axle suspension -Tie Rod Assembly – the tie rod assembly connects the center link to the steering arms. The steering arms are connected to the steering knuckles and may be bolted on to or be part of the knuckle/spindle assembly. A tie rod assembly consists of an inner and outer tie rod end connected by an adjuster sleeve or tube. Each tie rod adjuster sleeve has left-hand and right-hand threads that attach to the tie rod end and tie rod. Sleeve rotation changes the tie rod length and provides toe adjustment. Clamps are used to tighten the tie rod sleeves. Some tie rod assemblies use an inner and outer tie rod that is adjusted by threading the outer tie rod onto the threads of the inner tie rod. The outer tie rod is secured in place with a locking nut. -Steering Damper – the steering damper, also called the stabilizer, helps absorb road shock and prevents the shock from reaching the steering wheel. A steering damper is similar to a shock absorber. It is connected from one of the steering links to the chassis or frame. It is not used on all vehicles. It is most commonly found on larger full-frame or off road vehicles. When a front wheel strikes a road bump, the shock is transferred from the front wheel to the steering linkage, steering gear, and steering wheel. The steering damper reduces the effect on the steering wheel. the gold part -Parallelogram Operation – a parallelogram steering system operates by using a steering a gear box to transfer the steering movement from the steering shaft to the pitman arm. The pitman arm transfer steering motion to the center link. The center link then moves the tie rods, which are mounted to the steering knuckles. An idler arm is connected to the center link on the opposite end from the pitman arm. (picture is when the steering wheel moves to the right, the wheels and all the other parts move to the right as well.) -Power Steering Parts – parts of a conventional hydraulic power steering system include -The power steering hydraulic pump -Power steering hoses and lines -Power steering belt -Power steering fluid reservoir -Spool valve -Torsion bar -Steering rack -Pinion gear -Power Steering Purpose – power steering systems reduce the effect that is required by the driver to turn the steering wheel. Power steering systems may be -Conventional-type power steering systems, which use hydraulic fluid to provide steering assist -Electronic-type power steering systems, which use an electric motor that is mounted to the rack assembly or column to provide steering assist. -What to look for – when performing damage analysis inspections on a power steering system, it is important to look for signs of collision damage. Damaged parts are typically replaced -Power Steering Belt and Pulley Inspection -When inspecting a power steering belt, check for -Cracks or fraying to the webbing or cords -Proper belt tension (belts that slip will not provide the required pressure for steering assist) -Proper belt alignment (improperly aligned belts will cause premature wear of the belt) -When inspecting a pump pulley, check for -Bends or cracks to the pump pulley -A nick in the pulley (nicks can cause premature wear of the belt) -Power Steering Hose and Line Inspection – inspect power steering hoses and lines for -Leaks -Loose or poor connections -Cracks, bends, kinks, swelling, chafing, or other deterioration -Maintenance vs Collision Damage – hoses with a soft and spongy feel may be an indication an improper fluid has been used. If items are found to be in need of repair but appear to be maintenance items vs collision-related damage, these items need to be fully documented and reviewed with the customer. If the customer chooses not to repair these items, your conversation with the customer should be summarized on the final documents and signed by the vehicle owner, to confirm the customer is aware of the necessary repairs. -Hydraulic Power Steering Parts – parts of a typical hydraulic power steering system include the power steering pump, fluid reservoir, fluid lines and hoses, and fluid cooler. Power steering pumps may be either belt-driven or driven by electric motors. Electrically driven hydraulic power steering may be called electro-hydraulic power steering. Power steering coolers are typically hard lines that route the fluid in a back-and-forth pattern. The coolers are typically located in an area where there is good airflow, such as in front of the radiator or lower front crossmember left top Red is the pump, yellow is the reservoir, the hose is the black tube, the line is the silver tube -Electronically Controlled Steering – types of electronically controlled steering include -Variable-assist hydraulic power steering -Variable gear ratio steering -Electro-hydraulic power steering -Electric-assist power steering -Electric steer or steer-by-wire -Variable-Assist Hydraulic Power Steering – at low speeds, variable-assist power steering systems provide more steering assist to create minimal steering effort for easy turning. Electronically controlled variable-assist hydraulic power steering system parts include the parts of a typical hydraulic power steering system. These systems may have a fluid control valve or solenoid. Depending on system design, the fluid control valve can be located at the power steering pump or the steering gear. The system may have additional sensors and parts, and may be controlled by the powertrain control module, or another module -Electro-Hydraulic Power Steering – the main parts of an electro-hydraulic power steering system include the electric motor and hydraulic pump assembly. These are typically one-piece integral units. Depending on the vehicle, these may be located in the front of the vehicle, vulnerable to collision damage. Parts include the electronic control module and input sensors. The control module may be integrated into the pump and motor assembly. Typical input sensors include vehicle speed and electric motor temperature. Main parts also include a conventional power steering gear assembly. -Electric-Assist Power Steering – parts of an electric-assist power steering system include an electric motor mounted to either the steering column or steering gear. These systems use an electric motor instead of hydraulics to provide steering assist. Electric-assist power steering is typically a variable-assist design and uses an electronic control module to control the amount of steering assist provided. -Electric Steer or Steer-by-Wire – electric steer or steer-by-wire systems use an electric motor, instead of a mechanical shaft, to turn the wheels. Electric steer is typically used for the rear steering of four-wheel steering systems. With steer-by-wire, there is no mechanical connection between the steering column and steering gear. A variety of designs were used on early versions of rear four-wheel steering systems for sports and performance vehicles in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Some systems were totally mechanical, with a steering shaft controlling a rear steering gear, while others used hydraulics to turn the rear wheels, with or without electronic control Suspension System Overview (2/3) Front Suspension System -Visual Inspection Overview – During vehicle disassembly and repairs, it is important to identify any damage to suspension system parts so the vehicle is returned to the customer in a safe condition. Though a non-structural technician will not typically complete suspension-related work on a vehicle, they should have some familiarity with the parts, operation, and knowledge of inspecting basic damage. A visual inspection includes -Conducting a walk around to observe the positions of the wheels in relation to each other and the wheel openings -Looking for ride height differences from side to side, or front to back -Looking for any bent, twisted, or broken parts -Assessing parts that have shifted on their mounting locations -Checking bushings that have moved or are distorted, bent ball joints, and damaged or distorted dust/grease boots, which may indicate a bent ball joint stud. -*Inspect system-related cables, connectors, sensors, lines, and hoses for damage, as well as damage to the vehicle structure, where the suspension is mounted. If there are any unrelated or service/wear concerns, document them -Abnormal Noises – when moving the vehicle into the shop, listen for any abnormal noises. Clunking or rattling noises may indicate loose fasteners or bushings where steering or suspension parts attach to the chassis. If a bushing is loose in a part, it can cause unwanted movement where it attaches to the vehicle. Other causes of clunks include loose ball sockets on tie rods and ball joints, and part interference during suspension deflection. Clicking noises may indicate interference problems or problems with parts that have rotational movement. Rumbling or squealing sounds are typically caused by bearings or power steering problems. If there is damage to a tire or wheel, the corresponding wheel bearing may also be damaged. * Test equipment is available that utilizes clip-on microphones to allow listening to wheel bearings and other parts suspected of making noise -Front Suspension System Description – vehicle suspension systems are designed to support the vehicle, keep the tires in contact with the road surface, provide directional control of the vehicle, maintain alignment angles, and provide ride quality. Suspension systems found on vehicles include -MacPherson strut – a strut style suspension utilizes a strut with a coil spring to support the weight of the vehicle and maintain wheel position. A strut assembly consists of a strut housing with a strut rod, upper mount/bearing, and spring. Additional parts include the steering knuckle, hub and bearing assembly, lower control arm with ball joint, and stabilizer bar and links (if equipped). The strut mount attaches to the top of the strut rod and holds the coil spring in position. The strut mount also secures the strut assembly to the vehicle. * The strut also acts as a ride damper or shock absorber -Continued – the coil spring mounts between the strut and strut mount. The steering knuckle is typically a cast aluminum or cast steel part. The steering knuckle attaches to both the strut and the lower control arm, and sometimes the steering linkage. The steering knuckle also attaches to the hub, bearing, or spindle. The lower control arm attaches to the engine cradle or vehicle frame. The lower control arm positions the wheel at the bottom. The lower ball joint connects the lower control arm and steering knuckle. The ball joint allows movement when steering left and right, along with movement when the wheel moves up and down. Photo includes (from top to bottom): Upper strut mount, strut rod, coil spring, strut housing, steering knuckle, hub and bearing assembly, lower ball joint, lower control arm -Modified strut – a modified strut suspension system is similar to a MacPherson strut system in design. This type of strut has the coil spring located between the lower control arm and frame or crossmember, instead of on the strut housing. The spring, lower control arm, and ball joint support the vehicle’s weight. The lower control arm and upper strut mount maintain wheel position Photo includes (front right to left) – ball joint, coil spring, lower control arm, crossmember -Short-long arm (SLA) – parts of an SLA suspension include the: Steering knuckle, Hub and bearing or spindles and bearings, Upper and lower control arms, Ball joints, Coil springs (or torsion bars on some vehicles), Shock absorbers, Stabilizer bar and links (if equipped) – this may be referred to as a “sway bar” in some service information. * The steering knuckle may also be referred to as the spindle assembly Photo includes (from top to bottom): Upper ball joint, Steering knuckle, Spindle, Lower ball joint, Stabilizer links, Shock absorber, Coil spring, Stabilizer bar -Double wishbone – a double wishbone front suspension is a modified SLA design. Tis suspension features upper and lower control arms (wishbones) to position the wheel. The steering knuckle is taller than on a typical SLA suspension. This suspension uses a fixed position strut with coil spring that typically has a damper fork on the bottom to support the vehicle’s weight. The damper fork connects the strut to the lower control arm and allows the axle shaft to pass through its center. Double wishbone suspensions may have a radius arm attached to the lower control arm for positioning the lower ball joint at the correct position. * The strut assembly does not control wheel position on the double wishbone suspension Photo includes (from top to bottom): Upper control arm, Upper ball joint, Knuckle, Hub and bearing, Lower ball joint, Lower control arm, Damper fork, Strut assembly -Multi-link – a multi-link suspension is similar in design and function to double wishbone suspension, but instead of using a single upper and lower control arm, this system typically uses two upper and lower control arms. Each arm has a ball joint in the end where it connects to the steering knuckle. Multi-link suspensions use a fixed position strut or coil-over shock for suspension control. Only one of the lower arms is weight bearing, or has the strut attached to it. * Multi-link suspensions may use three or more control links/arms to control wheel position Photo includes (from top to bottom): Upper control arms(links), Coil-over shock, Steering knuckle, Hub and bearing assembly, Lower control arms (links) -Solid axle – parts of a typical solid axle front suspension include the axle housing, axle shafts, springs, shock absorbers, control arms, hub and bearing assemblies, stabilizer bar and links (if equipped), and steering knuckles. The steering knuckles are typically attached to the axle housing with ball joints, but may use bushed kingpins, or spindle bolts that provide the pivot points for the front wheels to turn. * Heavy trucks typically use a solid front axle beam Photo includes (from right to left): Hub assembly, Ball joint, Shock absorber, Spring, Control arm, Differential, Axle housing, Steering knuckle -Twin I-beam -* The twin I-beam suspension was popular on Ford trucks for many years and utilized two separate front axle beams Top left – MacPherson Strut Top right – Double Wishbone Bottom left – Multi-Link Bottom right – Short-Long Arm (SLA) Rear Suspension -Rear Suspension System Description – rear suspension systems may either be a solid axle design or an independent design. Solid axles may be drive axles on rear-wheel drive and four-wheel drive vehicles, or they may be trailing axles on front-wheel drive vehicles. An independent rear suspension is used to improve the ride and handling of a vehicle. Independent rear suspensions may be found on front- and rear-wheel drive vehicles, as well as four-wheel drive vehicles. They may be either a strut or an SLA design -Solid Drive Axle – parts of a typical solid drive axle rear suspension system include the axle housing, ring and pinion gears and differential, axle shafts, bearings, springs, shock absorbers, and stabilizer bar and links, if equipped. The wheel bearings are typically located in the end of the axle housing tube. Axles with leaf springs usually have U-bolts securing the axle to the springs, bushings in the front and rear spring eyes, a mounting bracket in the front, and rear mounting shackles. Axles with coil springs use trailing or control arms with bushings at the mounting points, and usually have a panhard rod/track bar to keep the axle centered Photo includes (from bottom to top): Axle shaft, leaf spring, Axle housing, Shock absorber -Solid Trailing Axle – parts of a typical solid trailing axle rear suspension system include the axle tube (or beam), springs, shock absorbers, trailing arms on coil spring designs, hub and bearing assemblies or spindles and bearings, and stabilizer bar and links, if equipped. Springs may either be coil or leaf design, with coil springs being the most common. Trailing arms have bushings where they connect to the axle housing and chassis. Some designs may have the trailing arms built into the axle housing. Photo includes (from left to right): Hub and bearing assembly, Trailing arm, Shock absorber, Track bar, Axle tube, Coil spring -Independent Strut Style – parts of a typical strut-style independent rear suspension system include control arms, knuckles, strut assemblies – which include the coil springs, stabilizer bar and links (if equipped), tie rods and tie rod ends, and radius rods or trailing arms. These systems have adjustable links for adjusting the rear toe. Tie rods may be adjustable or solid rods that adjust with cams where they attach to the chassis. Radius rods or trailing arms may be used for vehicles that have a single bar lower control arm. The radius rod or trailing arm is used to maintain the wheel position for the proper wheelbase. The independent strut rear suspension is typically found on front-wheel drive vehicles Photo includes (from left to right): Knuckles, Lower control arms, Strut assemblies -Independent SLA Style – parts of a typical SLA-style independent rear suspension system include the upper and lower control arms, ball joints, knuckles, springs, shock absorbers, stabilizer bar and links (if equipped), and tie rod and tie rod ends. Control arms have bushings where they are attached to the chassis. Springs may be either coil or leaf, with coil being the most commonly used. Photo includes (from top to bottom): Upper control arm, Tie rod, Lower control arm Suspension System Overview ( 3/3) Ride Height Control Parts and Operation -Ride Height Difference – when inspecting for ride height different, begin by looking at the tires and wheels. After an inspection of the tires and wheels indicate that there is no damage or that they are properly inflated, the next visual inspection criteria would be a ride height difference. This vehicle has a visible ride height difference, or is out of level, between the left and right front Ride height difference -Measuring Ride Height – ride height measurements can either be compared to a listed specification or to the opposite side of the vehicle. Ways of measuring ride height include measuring from the ground up to specified points on the chassis. This should be done on a level surface with the front wheels pointed straight ahead. Ride height can also be measured between suspension parts and reference points on the chassis. This method is used to identify a weak or damaged spring as the cause of the ride height problem, but will not identify which end of the vehicle has the bad spring. Ensure that the tires are all the same size and at the correct air pressure, and that there are no excessive loads in the vehicle, before measuring the ride height. * Having a location that is pre-determined to be level, for making measurements that need to be done from a level surface, can help to reduce damage analysis cycle time -Causes of Ride Height Problems – causes of ride height problems include -Structural damage to the vehicle -Weak or damaged springs, which will typically cause both ends of the side of the vehicle with the bad spring to have an incorrect ride height -A bent shock absorber or strut rod, which may limit suspension travel -* Ride height differences may be caused by uneven or excessive loads in the vehicle. Ensure that there are no excessive loads in the vehicle when checking ride height. Additionally, if equipped, custom aftermarket suspension parts and tires may result in measurements different than the original specifications for the vehicle, such as the ride height. * If a bent shock absorber or strut rod causes the suspension to become frozen, in eight the fully extended or fully retracted position, the ride height will not be correct -Electronically Controlled Suspension Identification – the presence of electronically controlled suspension systems is typically not identifiable by emblems or other highly visible labeling on the vehicle. *Caution! Identify disabling procedures for ride height control systems before jacking or lifting the vehicle to avoid system damage -Part Identification – perform a thorough visual inspection of the suspension system. Look for wiring connected to suspension parts, such as shock absorbers or struts. Look for the presence of air or hydraulic fluid lines to the shock absorbers, struts, or springs. Check for the presence of a malfunction indicator lamp (MIL) for an electronic suspension system when the ignition is first turned ON. A pre-scan may reveal damage-related codes. Look for switches on the dash or console for manual control of electronic suspension systems. Systems may have an On/Off switch, a switch for sport or comfort damper settings, or a switch for control of vehicle height. Visually identify parts that would indicate the presence of specific electronic or electronic/hydraulic systems -Option Labels – the vehicle option label provides useful information for system identification. Many repair shops and dealership parts departments can decode the option label to determine if an electronically controlled suspension system is present on the vehicle. A VIN-driven parts ordering system may also be used to determine if the vehicle is equipped with an electronically controlled suspension system -Computer-Controlled Ride Height – computer-controlled ride height systems are one type of electronically controlled suspension system. These systems are sometimes called level-ride or automatic load leveling systems. Computer-controlled ride height systems may be on the rear of the vehicle only, or the system may be on all four corners of the vehicle. Computer-controlled ride height systems may be air systems. The ride height may be adjusted using air shock absorbers, or the vehicle may be equipped with air springs. These systems may also be designed to use a hydraulic system that controls the ride height adjustment -Air Shock Absorber Height Control Systems – the simplest type of height control is the air shock absorber system, which only controls the height at the rear of the vehicle. These systems typically include rear air shock absorbers that do not act as springs for the vehicle, but rather, are used to assist the springs in holding the vehicle level with heavy loads. -Parts – height control systems include an air compressor with a dryer to remove moisture from the air. These systems may use air lines from the compressor to the shock absorbers. An exhaust valve allows air to be removed from the shock absorbers. The exhaust valve is typically built into the air compressor. These systems include height sensors that monitor the ride height of the vehicle. Some rear-only air shock absorber systems have a combination height sensor and control module assembly -Operation – height control systems that use a rear air shock absorber control the ride height be either adding or removing air from the shock absorber air chamber. These systems are controlled by the rear height sensor and control module. The height sensor determines rear ride height and either instructs the air compressor to run or the exhaust valve to open. Typically, these systems have delayed activation to avoid having the compressor run in response to temporary changes in ride height -Hydraulic Height Control Systems – hydraulic height control systems have hydro-pneumatic cylinders in place of the conventional shock absorbers or struts. These systems use the hydro-pneumatic cylinders to control both the ride height and suspension damping force. Hydro-pneumatic cylinders work in series with the vehicle springs. The hydraulic cylinders are used to work with the conventional springs and provide additional and adjustable spring rate and ride height to the vehicle. -Parts – the basic parts of a hydraulic height control system typically include a hydraulic fluid pump, fluid pressure accumulator, control valves or actuators, hydraulic cylinders, input sensors, a control module, switches, and other basic electrical circuit parts. Hydraulic systems may have high pressure fluids, which may cause injury – do not loosen lines or hose connections unless following service information cautions and procedures -Operation – hydraulic height control systems have accumulators that store hydraulic fluid in one chamber, separated from high pressure gas in another chamber by a rubber bladder. The system may have a front and rear accumulator or separate accumulators for each corner of the suspension. Control valves control the flow of hydraulic fluid between the accumulator and hydraulic cylinder. When the control module calls for increased ride height at a corner, the control valve opens a valve that allows fluid to flow into the hydraulic cylinder and lift the vehicle. Hydraulic fluid is added and removed from the hydraulic cylinders at each corner of the vehicle to either raise or lower ride height. Ride Damper Control Parts and Operation -Computer-Controlled Variable Shock Absorber Damping – another type of electronically controlled suspension is computer-controlled variable shock absorber damping. Variable shock absorber damping may be controlled mechanically by varying the orifice size for the shock absorber fluid. Damping may also be controlled magnetically by varying the viscosity of the shock absorber fluid -Semi-Active Suspensions – semi-active suspension systems typically consist of computer-controlled variable dampers that respond to up-and-down body motion inputs to read the road surface. These systems react to the first bounce or suspension deflection to control the second bounce or deflection. They are not active, but rather reactive. Semi-active systems do not directly control suspension deflection; they indirectly control it by altering the firmness of the shock absorber damping -Damper Controls – control of variable rate dampers is handled by a control module, which sends an output signal to a solenoid valve located inside the shock absorber body, or in a damping control unit located outside the shock absorber body. Another type of variable rate damper uses an electromagnetic coil to produce a magnetic field that changes the viscosity of a special hydraulic fluid -Internal Valve Damper Control – the operation of computer-controlled suspension dampers may be electronically controlled by a solenoid or stepper motor. These use internal actuators or valves located inside the damper body or piston to control the fluid in the shock absorber. Valves are opened or closed to vary the opening size and resistance to fluid flow inside the shock absorber. More resistance to flow produces a firmer suspension damping force, and less resistance produces softer damping force -External Valve Damper Control – the solenoid or stepper motor may be located in external damping valves on some systems. External damping units are used to allow for more valves than would fit internally in the shock absorber body. The additional valves allow a greater degree of tuning flexibility due to the increase in the number of damping force settings -Magnetic Damper Control – magnetically controlled variable damper systems have constant shock absorber valving with a variable viscosity fluid. These systems are less complicated and have fewer parts than valve-based variable dampers. The damping force firmness is controlled by varying the viscosity of the fluid inside the shock absorber, instead of varying the opening size that the fluid is forced through -Magnetic Damper Fluid – magnetic damper systems use a special fluid to control the damping force firmness. The fluid has special randomly suspended magnetic particles. In the presence of a magnetic field, the particles align themselves with the magnetic field lines and each other. This raises the viscosity of the fluid. The fluid has an unlimited range of viscosity depending on the strength of the magnetic field in which it is placed. It can go from a fluid-like state when no magnetic field is present, to an almost plastic-like state in the presence of a strong magnetic field. The magnetic field is produced by an electromagnet located on the piston of the damper. Off ontop. On on bottom -Combination System – vehicles with electronically controlled suspensions may have combination systems. Combination systems have computer control of both ride height and shock absorber damping. These may have air springs and separate computer-controlled variable dampers. Combination systems may use computer-controlled dampers to adjust both the ride height and handling characteristics of the vehicle. Dampers in these systems may be hydraulic struts with air bladders built in for springs, or they may be totally hydraulic for both suspension damping and ride height -Active Stabilizer Bars – conventional stabilizer bars (anti say bar/roll bar) help reduce body roll when cornering by connecting the left and right suspension together with a torsion bar and end links that transfer movement of the suspension on one side to the other, resisting body roll; this can result in a harsh ride condition. Active stabilizer bars allow for high levels of body roll control and suspension handling, while using softer springs and dampers for increased ride comfort. These stabilizer bars also have improved straight line suspension comfort over conventional stabilizer bars because they do not stiffen the basic suspension during a one-sided suspension compression. *Off-road vehicles may use a special stabilizer bar with an actuator that can decouple the two ends, allowing for greater suspension travel -Parts – the basic parts of an active stabilizer bar system include a hydraulic fluid pump and reservoir, control module, control valves, high pressure hydraulic fluid lines, lateral acceleration sensors, hydraulic motors or actuators, and stabilizer bars. Each axle may have a stabilizer bar that is made of two parts, or it may have a solid bar that is connected to the suspension on one side with a variable hydraulic linear actuator -Operation – when a vehicle that is equipped with active stabilizer bars goes around a corner or curve, the lateral acceleration or yaw rate sensors detect the body roll and send a signal to the control module. The control module acts on the valve blocks to supply pressurized hydraulic fluid to the correct side of the oscillating motor or hydraulic actuator. The oscillating motor, or actuator, then twists the stabilizer bar halves in opposite directions to counteract the roll of the vehicle body over the suspension The Best or Nothing: The Mercedes-Benz Story (X0039E-US.SSB) X0039E-US.SSB – Pre-Test In the Nice Speedweek race, Emil Jellinick entered a Daimler vehicle under what name -&gt; Monsieur Mercedes Which dealership department consults with customers to help them choose the best Mercedes-Benz vehicle to suit their needs? -&gt; Sales department Originally quoted by Gottlieb Daimler, which phrase has become the standard of Mercedes-Benz? -&gt; The best or nothing What does the “E” in the acronym LEAD stand for? -&gt; Excel – X - wrong What does the online system, NetStar, do for Mercedes-Benz emplyoees? -&gt; it provides specific information and a calculator for financial products – X - wrong Why is “the voice of the customer” important to Mercedes-Benz? -&gt; All of the above – it keeps us in touch with the changing trends and desires of the luxury vehicle market, it allows us to get feedback and find new ways to improve, and it helps us build empath with our customers in a way that lets us know what’s important to them Who owns the vehicle that Mercedes-Benz dealerships lease to customers? -&gt; the customer – X - wrong How does StarTrek Info help Mercedes-Benz Technicians? -&gt; it provides continuing education on new Mercedes-Benz systems and parts – X - wrong In the United States, where is the Daimler factory located? -&gt; Michigan – X - wrong Which of the following describes the first patented motor vehicle, the Patent Motorwagen, designed by Karl Benz? -&gt; All of the above – Three wheels, one horsepower engine, and gasoline-powered engine with electric ignition What does the Vehicle Master Inquiry System do? -&gt; It houses a database of all Mercedes-Benz technical bulletins – X - wrong What is the value of offering a test drive? -&gt; To give the customer a first-hand understanding of what it means to drive a Mercedes-Benz Which of the following is true of the Daimler factory in the United States? -&gt; Builds SUVs for the world market On what was considered the longest motor trip at the time, how many miles did Bertha Benz and her two sons travel? -? 111 In what year did the Daimler and Benz company merge to form a single company? -&gt; 1916 – X – wrong X0039E-US.SSB – Lesson 1 Introduction -One of the first road trips ever was taken by a woman named Bertha. The 3 points on the Mercedes logo each represent something. X0039E-US.SSB – Lesson 2 What’s in a Name? -Karl Benz (1844-1929) – born in Germany, trained as engineer. Found his benz company. -Gottlieb Daimler (1834-1900) – engineer, worked with – -Wilhelm Maybach (1846-1929) – to develop gas engine -Karl Benz – January 29, 1886: - applied for patent on first vehicle, the Patent Motorwagen -Patent Motorwagen – -Gasoline-powered engine -3 wheels -Single cylinder -4-stroke -Electric ignition -1 horsepower -Longest road trip ever taken by an internal combustion engine at the time: -Patent Motorwagen -August 1988 -Bertha, Eugen, and Richard Benz -From Mannheim to Pforzheim, Germany -180 km, or 111 miles -Three days -Milestone in history: Benz Velo, 1894 – Four Wheeled Motor Carriage -First four-wheel vehicle driven by a high-speed combustion engine -Gasoline-powered engine (aka, “Grandfather Clock”) -4 wheels -Single upright cylinder -4-stroke -Hot-tube ignition system -1.1 horsepower -Emil Jellinek (185-1918) – -Austo-Hungarian Consul -Sold Daimler cars -Entered Daimler vehicles into races -1899- Jellinek entered the 23 horsepower HP Daimler in the NICE Speedweek race. -Named the vehicle Monsieur Mercedes -Mercedes, meaning “Grace” (in Spanish, after his 9 year old daughter) -After a racing accident, Emil Jellinek asked for a new vehicle that was safe, and could handle more power -Wilhelm designed the Daimler Simplex -Emil ordered 36 of them, and marketed them under the Mercedes name -Milestone: Origin of the Mercedes name -Milestone in history: Daimler-Benz is formed in 1926 - https://www.mercedes-benz.com/en/mercedes-benz/classic/history/mercedes-benz-vehicles/ -Be inspired by confidence: Mercedes-Benz invented the automobile… the first motor car… and took the first road trip X0039E-US.SSB – Lesson 2 -What’s in a Name? -Milestone in history: Daimler-Benz is formed in 1926 -3 pointed star from Daimler and the -3 pointed star came from a post card sent Daimler wife. The Three-pointed Star decoded on land, sea and in the air. X0039E-US.SSB - Lesson 3 -Fueled by Daimler -Daimler AG Facts: -Parent Company of Mercedes-Benz -Located in Stuttgart, Germany -One of the largest automaters in the world -Daimler AG: -Leading global producer of premium passenger cars -Largest manufacturer of commercial vehicles in the world -Makes all types of vans, buses, and coaches. -Freightliner vehicle is a Daimler Truck -Freightliner, Mercedes-Benz, Western Star, Mitsubishi FUSO, Thomas Built Buses, BharatBenz -Daimler Buses: -Mercedes-Benz -Setra -Orion -Daimler has 4 different passenger car brands -Smart -Mercedes AMG -Maybach -Mercedes-Benz -History Milestone: AMG was founded in 1967 -One Man – One Engine – philosophy -Every AMG automobile is engineered to please the worlds most discriminating drivers and deliver on our promise of driving performance -AMG developed special sports performance for all MB passenger cars -Daimler – -Commercial vehicles -Passenger vans -Buses and coaches -Passenger cars -Daimler sells products all over the world. 17 manufacturing facilities on 5 continents -Bremen – oldest factory -C-Class Coupe and Cabriolet, E-Class Coupe and Cabriolet, SLC, SL, GLC -Rastatt – -A-Class, B-Class, and GLA -Sindelfingen – largest factory -S-Class, E-Class, CLS-Class, and AMG GT -Parts Distribution Center: a facility used for receipt, temporary storage, and redistribution of vehicles and vehicle parts according to the customer orders as they are received X0039E-US.SSB – Lesson 4 A Day at the Dealership Synergy for Success -The Moment of Truth -James Logan – owns MB of Silverlake -“The Best or Nothing “ Daimler X0039E-US.SSB – Lesson 5 -Mercedes-Benz Financial Services: -Captive finance company -Partners with dealers -1). Dealers purchase inventory from MBUSA -Note: Floor planning is a type of short term loan used by retailers to purchase high-cost inventory such as automobiles. These loans are often secured by the inventory purchased as collateral -2. Once the vehicles are delivered, the dealer pays interest on the loan until they sell the vehicle to a customer -Line of Credit -&gt; they can service Business Loans -Alternate Transportation -Capital Loans -Mercedes-Benz Financial Services – once the vehicle has been sold, the dealer assigns the contract to Mercedes-Benz Financial Services. Mercedes-Benz Financial Services transfers funds to the dealer. The vehicle is removed from the dealer’s line of credit -When a lease ends, Mercedes-Benz Financial Services determines what happens with the vehicle. -A lease vehicle can be disposed of through three primary channels: -Customer – can purchase the vehicle at residual value -Dealer – can purchase the vehicle for their Pre-Owned fleet -Auction – Vehicle can be entered into auction -Mercedes-Benz Financial Services -Helps support the ownership experience for both retail and lease customers -Develops, maintains, and provides resources for vehicle repair and maintenance -Service – Technicians use – STAR TekInfo – official MBUSA site that hosts technical information for service and repair on Mercedes-Benz vehicles -MBUSA – provides dealers with direct communication with specialists -Vehicle Master Inquiry System – helps dealers maintain ownership and service records -Mercedes-Benz Academy – provides technical, product, and skills training -Three orders -Stock Order – within 48 hours from your facing PDC, up to 5 days from non-facing PDCs -Daily Stock Order (DSO) – next day from facing PDC if the order is placed before 1pm, up to 5 days from non-facing PDC -Vehicle Off-Road (VOR) – urgent parts received within 24 hours -MBUSA has 5 parts distribution centers -California -Texas -Illinois -Florida -New Jersey -CAC (customer assistance center) Contact Info: 1-800-FOR-MERCEDES (800-367-6372) -Fax: 1-201-476-6212 -Email: Mercedes_benz@mailca.custhelp.com X0039E-US.SSB – Lesson 6 Driven to Delight Customers are the VIPs -Driven to Delight – Delivering World-Class Customer Experience the Mercedes-Benz Way -LEAD = Listen, Empathize, Add value, Delight -Show Empathy -This shows MB way of delivering exceptional service -Delight – Share Knowledge, Add a touch of luxury -&gt; My WOW -Add Value – Surprise me, Show gratitude -&gt; My interaction -Empathize – Respect my time, I want to belong to MB -&gt; My Interaction -Listen – Know me, Make me feel special, Listen to me -&gt; My customer -Every customer, every time, everywhere, no exceptions -List: - www.mercedes-benz.com/en/Mercedes-benz/classic/museum -MBUSA Website: mbusa.com -Daimler Website: www.daimler.com -MBUSA Youtube Channel: www.youtube.com/user/mbusa -Twitter: @MercedesBenz -Instagram: @mbusa @mercedesbenz -Facebook: www.facebook.com/MercedesBenz -LinkedIn: www.linkedin.com/company/mercedes-benz-usa -iBooks on LL: learn.mbusa.com Understanding Cycle Time as an Appraiser (1/2) Cycle Time Overview -Cycle Time Definition – what is cycle time? It is the time from the beginning to the end of a process. The definition of cycle time varies slightly depending on perspective. For example, for the: -Customer, or vehicle owner, it is the time from when the vehicle keys are handed to a repair facility to when the keys are returned after a satisfactory vehicle repair -Repair facility, it may be a measurement of time from when the vehicle arrived to when the vehicle is delivered to the customer -Insurer, it is the time from the first notice of loss until the last payment of the claim. Insurers will also monitor repair facility cycle time by looking at keys-to-keys or the length of time for a rental car -Cycle Time Definition – what is cycle time? It is the time from the beginning to the end of a process. The definition of cycle time varies slightly depending on perspective. For example, for the: -Customer, or vehicle owner, it is the time from when the vehicle keys are handed to a repair facility to when the keys are returned after a satisfactory vehicle repair -Repair facility, it may be a measurement of time from when the vehicle arrived to when the vehicle is delivered to the customer -Insurer, it is the time from the first notice of loss until the last payment of the claim. Insurers will also monitor repair facility cycle time by looking at keys-to-keys time or the length of time for a rental car -Who Affects Cycle Time? – everyone affects cycle time including: -Those involved in the processing of the claim -The call center claim rep -The auto physical damage appraiser (APDA) -Repair facilities -Sublet vendors -The customer -Benefits of Reducing Cycle Time – the benefits of reducing cycle time include improved customer satisfaction index (CSI), reduced rental car time, an increase in productivity, and an increase in the quality of work. CSI is the measure of how the vehicle owner feels about the entire repair experience. Vehicles that are returned faster to the customer can add to the positive repair experience -Production Efficiency – one goal is to develop an efficient production process so the vehicles flow through the repair process without any interruption. This can lead to increased capacity which will help other vehicles in early stages of the claims process move forward more quickly. Work that is done more efficiently has a direct effect on the quality of the work done. When there is less of a rush to get the vehicle ready for delivery, fewer things get missed. Additionally, when there is less stress, everyone involved in the claims process has a positive attitude, and it shows in the quality of work output and CSI results -Principles of Reducing Cycle Time – the principles of reducing cycle time include doing tasks that allow work to be done more continuously on each vehicle, not necessarily being more productive on each vehicle. Working more continuously on each vehicle means less time spent in each repair bay as the vehicle keeps moving to the next stage of repair. This is commonly referred to as touch time. Other principles include breaking down the barriers that slow workflow and improving efficiency in every phase of the repair -Methods of Reducing Cycle Time – methods an APDA could implement to improve repair efficiency include: -Coordinating with the repair shop to inspect the vehicle the same day it is scheduled to be fully disassembled and ready for an initial or supplement inspection -Inspecting all damaged bolt-on parts and structural, electrical, and mechanical damages to ensure all damage is identified. This will reduce the likelihood of additional supplements -Reviewing damage in detail with the repair shop to build an itemized blueprint of the repair plan. Set expectations for communication regarding questionable damage or future supplemental damage that is found -What Reducing Cycle Time does not mean – reducing cycle time does not mean cutting corners, sacrificing quality for faster times, or doing an incomplete or improper repair. The goal is having a complete and safe repair, while at the same time improving the claim cycle -Measuring Cycle Time – in order to improve cycle time, record a baseline measurement of at least 30 days of data. For example, record the days from when the claim is assigned to an APDA to the date the customer is contacted to schedule the repair inspection. Also, record when the claim is assigned to an APDA to the date the initial inspection is completed. Can cycle time be broken down even further? -Breaking Down Cycle Time – within the claims process, there are several areas, or sub-cycles, we can focus on. For example, cycle time could be from when the estimate is complete to the start of the repair or from the date of the supplement request to supplement completion. Tracking sub-cycle time will help to identify opportunities for improvement. If you only look at the initial call to final payment, you lose opportunities for efficiency. Any improvement in sub-cycle time will improve overall cycle time -Chart Cycle Time – Identify Improvement Opportunities – vendors of claim management systems and insurance companies use various computer programs to measure and calculate cycle times. Use a simple chart to record cycle time. Include rows and columns to note milestones. Include when the APDA was notified of vehicle disassembly, a supplement request was made, and when the vehicle was re-inspected. Also, record when the vehicle was re-inspected to the date the supplement was completed and provided to the repair facility. Note when the vehicle was dropped off at the repair facility to the date of delivery. Another sub-cycle is from when the claim was assigned to the APDA to the date final payment was issued and the claim was closed. From this information, average the totals, with the final column indicating the total cycle time. This allows you to evaluate the numbers and determine opportunities for improvement -Inaccurate or Missing Information – inaccurate or missing information can affect the claims process. For example, inaccurate or missing information can lead to supplements, lost productivity, and increased claims processing expense. Examples of inaccurate or missing information may include the: -Customer contact information -Customer address -Vehicle information -Facts of loss -Damage location -Repair facility location -Lean Processing – one of the steps of eliminating waste is to work lean. Lean processing in a one-phrase definition is to get the right tools and materials to the right place at the right time while minimizing waste. For example, reviewing all assigned vehicle inspections and mapping out the most efficient route for completing the inspections would be an example of minimizing waste. Implementing lean processes also requires being open to change. Lean processing is about working efficiently, being organized, and always looking for opportunities for improvement. Lean processing principle include a commitment to continuously improving work quality and taking a proactive, rather than a reactive approach. It is more productive to anticipate problems before they happen and implement a preventive action, rather than dealing with them as they occur -Applied to an APDA – what are some lean processes that can be applied to an APDA? Some examples include creating files for each of the standard required documents and having them available when inspecting a vehicle. Create SOPs for a “toolbox”, such as cameras, forms, a tape measure, and tread depth gauges. Review all scheduled appointments to ensure the most efficient route mapping. This will help to ensure the right tools are at the right place at the right time while minimizing waste -SOPs – many insurers and collision repair facilities have developed SOPs to provide written, and in some cases, visual guidance to ensure processes are performed exactly the same every time -Examples of SOPs for an APDA – what are some SOPs an APDA could implement? -Have contact with vehicle owners in the same day to coordinate inspection appointments -Thoroughly review the vehicle to identify all damage visible at the time of inspection -Review the damage and repair plan in detail, and communicate expectations for supplemental damages if the vehicle is at a repair facility -Complete the estimate while on-site at the vehicle. This will allow you to compare the appraisal to the damaged vehicle to verify that nothing was overlooked, while having easy access in the event questions arise -Follow guidelines for digital photos -Complete supplement inspections and provide copies to the repair facility within 24 hours of request Understanding Cycle Time as an Appraiser (2/2) Cycle Time Management before Repairs -Cycle Time Bandits – cycle time bandits are practices that steal time and make process time less efficient. Cycle time bandits specific to estimating include an incomplete damage report and hidden damage discovered after the repair process has begun. This can result in supplements and repairs that have not been authorized, thus causing delays. These do not have insurance authorization, so the repair may have to wait. How do you reduce cycle bandits? Blueprinting -Repair Blueprinting – blueprinting provides an entire repair plan picture before repairs are started. All needed parts are determined down to the clips, moldings, and one-time use fasteners. This helps to ensure all the parts are in-house before work is begun, determine any sublet work, and find and hidden damage. Many repair facilities have implemented repair blueprinting. Blueprinting is often credited as being the number one efficiency improvement step. This allows the vehicle to enter the repair stream and continue without stopping -Vehicle Disassembly – blueprinting should include disassembly sufficient to expose 100% of the related damage. This means disassembling the vehicle until all of the damaged parts and related panels are removed. Disassembly exposes all damage by removing all related panels necessary to obtain access. This will also allow all damaged parts requiring replacement to be identified and ordered. Disassembly will determine which clips or fasteners must be ordered. Because some clips or fasteners will break during removal, identifying these up front will allow them to be ordered and be on hand during the reassembly process -Repair vs Replace Decisions – disassembly of the vehicle to the point of exposing all related damage also allows for all repair vs replace decisions to be made. Have vehicle maker repair procedures available at the time of disassembly. This will also help to identify any tools, equipment, or repair materials required -Completing the Teardown – note that disassembly of the vehicle to expose 100% of the related damage should not be comprised based on job size. Teardown at the beginning may feel like wasted time or inefficient use of time, but it allows an efficient repair process. Benefits include that all parts are ordered, and there are no surprises during the repair, resulting in better cycle time, reduced rental and claims processing exposure, and improved CSI results. The APDA should communicate with the shop expectation that they need digital documentation of the teardown stages. Record stages of the disassembly with digital photos and measurements. This can be done with a tape measure or an electronic measuring system. If electronic measuring is available, include a printout of the measurements -Technician Participation – why is it important for the technician to be available when writing an estimate? Technician input helps determine what can be repaired and what must be replaced. This input also helps with the parts ordering, such as what can be reused and what needs to be purchased. Writing an estimate without technician input can lead to installing a part even when it is not needed. In a time when severity is driving up the number of totals, it becomes more critical to understand what can be repaired and what absolutely must be replaced. A technician may be able to work on dents during the blueprinting process to verify repairability. Writing an estimate without technician participation can lead to a part being discarded without photo documentation -What is a Supplement? – what is a supplement? A supplement is identifying additional parts or labor necessary to complete the repair. As an industry, supplements have become too commonplace and accepted as just part of doing business. Don’t let this be your culture. The repair processes are more efficient if more time is taken at the beginning than filing a supplement in the middle or end of the repair. There is a saying “slow down to go faster”. Going slower on the front end during blueprinting means faster repairs toward the end of the process. Avoid the temptation and pressure to hurry through the estimating and blueprinting process. One of the reasons for disassembling the vehicle to expose 100% of the related damage is to avoid supplements which result in repair delays -What does a Supplement Cost? – actual supplement costs vary according to what needs to be repaired. But it is important to look beyond just part and labor cost. Supplement costs include decreased CSI. Customers will feel frustrated when the vehicle is not delivered on the date promised. Unhappy customers could translate to lost business. This could also result in additional expenses for added services to improve customer relations. Supplement costs also include longer keys-to-keys. This can result in increased rental or claims processing time. For the APDA, supplement costs can include lost time for new claim inspections and additional travel expenses. What can be done to help avoid supplement costs? Follow proper blueprinting processes, including disassembly sufficient to expose all related damage Understanding High Voltage Safety (1/2) Electricity Basics -Voltage – voltage is the amount of pressure that is available to push the current through a conducting loop or circuit. This is the electrical potential difference, or the difference in electrical potential between two places in a circuit. Higher voltage will push larger amounts of current through a circuit. If there is no voltage, there can be no current flow. Voltage is measured in volts. The symbol for voltage is V or sometimes an E (electromotive force) when voltage is used in mathematical equations. -Voltage = Pressure -Measured in Volts -Symbol = V or E -Current – current is the rate of flow of electricity, the quantity of electrons moving past a fixed point in one second. It is measured in amperes or amps. The symbol for current is A or I in equations. There are two types, direct current (DC) and alternating current (AC) -Current = Rate of Flow of Electrons -Measured in Ampere or Amps -Symbol = A or I -Direct Current (DC) – with DC circuits, current flows in only one direction. Typically, DC power comes from batteries that have negative and positive terminals. Current is the flow of electrons from the negative side of a battery through the circuit to the positive side of the battery. On most low voltage systems, less than 60 volts DC, the negative battery terminal is connected to the vehicle chassis. This is called grounding. High voltage systems, 60 volts or higher, are isolated from the vehicle body and chassis on both the positive and negative side of the system -Direct Current (DC): -Flow of electrons in single direction -Example – automotive battery provides DC -Alternating Current (AC) – alternating current switches direction in a circuit, alternating back and forth many times per second. AC is commonly supplied by utility companies to residential and commercial locations. Alternating current is also used in electric and hybrid vehicle drive motors and related circuits -Alternating Current (AC): -Flow of electrons switch direction backward and forward -Resistance – electrical resistance restricts the flow of electric current. Within an electrical circuit, a motor or other load are the main source of resistance. Components called resistors may also be added to a circuit to restrict the flow of electricity. Resistance is measured in ohms and the resistance symbol is Ω or R when u sed in equations -Resistance = Restriction to Flow -Measured in Ohms -Symbol = Ω or R -Ohm’s Law – in most situations, you will not need to use Ohm’s Law to perform your job. The Ohm’s Law Formula does not provide a great visual of the relationship between voltage, current, and resistance. An understanding of this relationship is very important when working around high voltage (HV) systems. With Ohm’s Law, if we know two of the circuit values, we can solve for the third value. For example: if we know what the voltage and resistance are in the circuit, we can solve for the current in the circuit. Voltage divided by resistance equals current. Here are two examples of the Ohm’s Law relationship: -If the voltage in a circuit increases and resistance stays constant, the amount of current will decrease -If the voltage in a circuit stays constant and resistance decreases, the amount of current will increase -To find the voltage – V = I x R -To find the current – I = V ÷ R -To find the resistance – R = V ÷ I -Ohm’s Law – -Voltage – using Ohm’s Law, lets solve for the voltage in this circuit. We know that the circuit has 0.3 amps of current. We also see that there are 40 ohms of resistance in the circuit. Ohm’s Law states that current multiplied by resistance equals voltage. For example, in this circuit 0.3 amps X 40 ohms = 12 volts. -Current – lets solve for the current in this low voltage circuit. We know that the circuit has a 12-volt power supply. We also know that there are 60 ohms of resistance in the circuit. Ohm’s Law states voltage divided by resistance equals current. For example, in this circuit 12 volts / 60 ohms = 0.2 amps -Resistance – finally, lets solve for the resistance in this circuit. We know that the circuit has 3 amps of current. We also know that there is a 12-volt battery in the circuit. Ohm’s Law states that voltage divided by current equals resistance. For example, in this circuit 12 volts / 3 amps = 4 ohms -Power Source – a basic electrical circuit contains a power source, load, and path with wires connecting them all together. The power source provides voltage for a circuit. Batteries, electrical generators, and alternators are common sources of power. When a power source is connected to a complete circuit, voltage pushes electrical current. -Circuit Path – wires provide the path for current to flow. Circuits are insulated wire that connect different system parts together in a circuit. They use connectors at the attachment points on the parts to link them together. A wiring harness is a group of wires routed around the vehicle. Electricity flows through some materials more easily than others. There materials are either conductors or insulators. Insulators are materials that restrict or stop current flow. Glass, plastic, and some types of rubber are insulators. Wood is not considered a good conductor, but it will conduct electricity. Wet wood conducts better than dry wood. Pure water is not a good conductor, but most water is not pure. Water typically contains impurities; these can act as charged particles called ions which allowed current to flow. -Loads – loads consume the electrical energy in a circuit and perform work. Typical loads may include: -Lights -Heating elements -Displays -Sneakers -Motors -Solenoids -Note that batteries may be considered a load in a circuit when they are being charged -Switches, Relays, and Circuit Protections – switches provide a way to open or close the circuit path so the load can be turned on or off. A relay is an electromagnetic switch that is operated by a relatively small electric current that can turn on or off another electric circuit. So, a relay is an electric-controlled switch. Circuit protections are designed to open the circuit path if excessive current is flowing. This provides protection for other parts in the circuit. -Relay Use in HV System – as mentioned, a relay can be used to turn on or off another separate circuit, such as a much larger electric current system like a high voltage battery. In this case, relays are used to provide electrical isolation of the HV system from the low voltage circuit. The low voltage circuits are grounded to the chassis. The high voltage circuit is not grounded to the chassis. It uses a floating system that will be discussed in detail later in this module. The relay or contactor provides the on and off switching of the high voltage system providing the electrical isolation required. -Your Body: Conductor or Insulator? – our bodies are not insulators, they are conductors. It is true that they are not as good of a conductor as a metal wire, but your body will conduct current if you become part of a circuit. We are conductors because our body is mostly made of water. If your body becomes part of an electrical circuit, you may be injured or killed if enough current is flowing through your body. Our brains, nerves, and muscles run on small electrical signals. Large amounts of electricity can cause harmful interruptions to those electrical signals. -Electrical conductors allow the energy to go through it – sea water, gold, silver -Electrical insulators don’t allow the energy to go through it – glass, rubber, plastic -You have skin in the game – our skin has higher resistance than your inner tissue. Dry skin tends to have high resistance, but this does not make your skin an insulator. Dry skin might increase your resistance at the contact points, but at higher voltage levels, this can break down quickly with devastating results. If you skin is damp or wet, its resistance will be lower which lowers your outer body resistance. Wet skin significantly lowers your resistance allowing even more current to flow. Ohm’s Law might not be at the top of your thoughts when working on or around vehicles, but its results can kill you if your skin accidently contacts high voltage -Electric Shock – electric shock occurs when a person comes into contact with an electrical power source, and current flows through the body or some portion of the body. Electrical shock may result in no injury at all or may result in severe injury or even death. If the voltage is low, current is very small. Electricity may not be felt at all. As voltage increases, current increases. Depending on your body resistance and the current path through your body, there will be a point that you will feel the effects of being shocked. A slight shock can be a disturbing tingling sensation. The typical response is to release an object when lightly shocked. -High Voltage and Ohm’s Law – so why did we discuss Ohm’s law earlier in this module? Ohm’s Law applies to you if you ever become part of the circuit! Here is why. Ohm’s Law states that for a given voltage, current will flow inversely proportional to the circuit resistance. This means less resistance in a circuit will equal more current. It also holds true that for a given resistance, more voltage will push more current through the circuit. When you get shocked, your body becomes a conductor in the circuit. Your body has some amount of resistance, but it is not an insulator. With low voltage circuits, a small amount of current will flow, and you may not feel much of a shock. At higher voltage levels, more current will flow, and this may cause a severe shock -Electric Shock – Electrocution – large amounts of electricity flowing through our bodies can result in severe injury or death. A significant electrical shock can cause very severe injuries to the heart, brain, nervous system, and burns to tissue. The voltage levels present in the HV systems of electric vehicles is at a high enough level that it can cause severe injury or death by electrocution. -Shocking Examples – a rule to live by: current will flow through all available paths. Do not become a path. Some examples include: -Touching both wires in a powered circuit -Placing your body in parallel with the power source or load with power applied -Placing your body across the only open in an otherwise complete circuit -A technician’s metal tool accidentally comes in contact with an energized part of the circuit, and your body is in contact with the other side of power -Arc Flash Hazard – electrocution isn’t the only hazard when working around high voltage batteries. Today’s high voltage batteries can present another element of danger to the body called arc flash. An arc flash is an electrical explosion. The high temperatures cause rapid heating of the surrounding air and extreme pressures, resulting in an arc blast. The high voltage propulsion batteries store a large amount of energy and present an arc blast and arc flash hazard is shorted. Disconnecting connectors or parts while power is applied (under load) also presents an arc flash hazard. Because of the force of the arc blast explosion, burns, concussions, hearing loss, shrapnel injuries, and eye injury are all common injury. -Risk Management – protecting yourself from electrical shock is a matter of ensuring there are no open, accessible, high voltage sources and no possible paths for current to flow through any part of your body. What not to wear when working around high voltage systems are items that are good conductors. Remove these conductive items before working near a high voltage system. What to wear when working around high voltage (or if there is any doubt about high voltage system integrity) are items that are good insulators and provide protection in case of accidental contact with high voltage or a short circuit. Following the vehicle service procedures and precautions is also a major factor in risk management. -What not to wear – watches, rings, necklaces -What to wear – electrically insulated gloves and boots, face shield to protect against arc flash sparks, flame-resistance clothing to reduce danger from sparks -Lineman gloves – knowing when it is necessary to wear lineman’s gloves is critical. Insulating gloves are the first line of defense, providing protection against shock and electrocution if contact is made with an exposed high voltage circuit or part. Some vehicle markers state that you need to wear your lineman’s gloves anytime you are working around high voltage parts or if you are unsure of the presence of high voltage. These parts may include but are not limited to: -High voltage battery -System main relay -Service plug receptacle and fuse -Orange-colored cables -Inverter assembly -Electric drive motors -Lineman’s Gloves Ratings/Layering – the voltage in some electric vehicles may exceed 800 volts. To provide protection it is recommended to use glove ratings that are class 0. This rating is recommended for EV/HEV work. Class 0 gloves have the following ratings -Maximum AC use voltage of 1,000 volts -AC/proof tested to 5,000 volts -Maximum DC use voltage of 1,500 volts -DC/proof tested to 20,000 volts -Color label – Red -When using lineman’s gloves, put them on in the following order: -1) Cotton liners t absorb moisture on hands -2) High-voltage gloves -3) Leather outer gloves to help protect the HV gloves from cuts or puncture -The leather protectors should not be used for any other purpose. A sliver of metal lodged in the leather glove could damage the linemen’s gloves -Inspection Requirements – safety regulations require that the technician who will use the insulated rubber gloves inspect the gloves for damage before each use. Also inspect them following any incident that may have caused damage. If the inspection finds any of the following, the gloves should be discarded: -Hole, tear, puncture, crack, or cut -Embedded foreign object -Dry rot cracks -Texture changes caused by swelling, softening, hardening, or becoming sticky or inelastic -The gloves should be tested every six months by an official testing facility. Once the gloves are removed from the plastic bag they were shipped in, they start to deteriorate. So, even if they are used only once, they will require retesting in six months -High Voltage PPE – vehicle makers may identify specific high voltage personal protective equipment (PPE) that may include -Outer gear -Arc flash protective face shield -Arc-rated hood -Class 0 lineman’s glove kit -Storage bags -Conclusion – understanding electrical principles and personal protective measures are a couple of the ingredients in working with high voltage systems safely. Complacency may get you hurt or worse. You don’t have to fear working on high voltage systems, you must respect high voltage and take proper precautions. In the next module, we will look at the electric vehicle safety methods and examine a number of different ways that a technician can greatly reduce the risk of electrical shock by following policies and procedures. Understanding High Voltage Safety (2/2) Electrical Vehicle Safety -Is this vehicle safe to work on? – when preparing to inspect or work on any vehicle with HV systems, this should always be your first question. Is this vehicle safe for me to work on? A vehicle that has been in a collision may have unknown damage to high voltage system parts causing a normally safe system to become unsafe. Whenever there is any concern regarding the HV system integrity, it is best to approach the vehicle assuming there are unknown hazards until proven otherwise. Determining the condition and integrity of a vehicle’s HV system should be performed by a technician with the knowledge and training for the specific vehicle. More information on HV system inspections and service is covered in other courses -Safety First – you don’t need to be afraid of electricity, but you do need to respect it by managing the risk of an electric shock. Vehicle high voltage systems are designed with high voltage power management, containment, and safety features. This helps ensure the occupants are safe from shock hazards under normal operating conditions and in most collision scenarios. Many of these features also provide some measure of protection for service technicians conducting routine maintenance unrelated to HV systems. So, as you prepare to work on or around an electric vehicle, follow general safety precautions -Preventing High Voltage Direct Contact – no one intentionally wants to get shocked or electrocuted. It’s always a mistake that causes an electrical shock or worse. High voltage systems have safety systems built into the vehicle. Vehicle makers have specific procedures for working around these systems, that if followed, the HV systems will be powered down and made safe to perform collision and other repairs. Keep in mind, the HV battery will always store high voltage. When you walk up to the vehicle, do you know that the HV system has not been compromised? Is it shut down properly? Is there zero risk? Until you are certain, you need to use the appropriate PPE to avoid high voltage direct contact. PPE is that final safety layer of protection against electrical hazards and accidental direct contact -The I-Car Electric Vehicle – the vehicle, systems, and parts shown are not of a specific vehicle make or model, but rather a generic representation for the purposes of training. These systems and parts are what is typically found in production vehicles with the HV electric systems. Production vehicles have many similar parts and features and have additional modules and parts with different names that make up the HV system. The following screens will explain the main electrical parts and functions of a vehicle’s HV system. It’s important to have an understanding of how the parts and systems function together along with the safety features designed into HV electric vehicles. It’s always required that you have the appropriate training and service information for the vehicle on which you are working. -Low Voltage Electric System – electric vehicles have an on-board low voltage system that is separate or electrically isolated from the HV system. The low voltage system is used for many of the electrical and electronic systems and features that are found on most non-electric vehicles -Low Voltage Electrical System Schematic- the electronic control modules that manage, monitor, and command the HV systems are usually powered by the low voltage system for safety purposes. Low voltage electrical systems are connected to the chassis/body of the vehicle in most vehicles creating a common ground for electrical current in the low voltage systems. The low voltage system has its own unique power distribution path known as a 12 volt buss. The positive or hot side of the low voltage system circuits is isolated and insulated from the chassis and routed to the intended circuits and systems, so it does not short-to-ground or create an unintentional path to another circuit or system. This is accomplished with insulating materials in the wiring, connectors, and part design -High Voltage Isolation Schematic – the HV electrical system must keep the high voltage contained and isolated from the vehicle chassis, other circuits, and unintended destinations and deliver the energy to the HV system parts as managed by the control modules. The HV system has its own unique power distribution path known as an HV buss. HV systems require a high degree of isolation and insulation due to the increased shock/electrocution and arc potential. The current from the HV system should not be going to unintended locations. High voltage does not drip like a fuel leak. There is no smell. It just waits patiently for you to make a mistake and zap, it shocks you. -High Voltage Battery – the HV battery is used to power the electric motors and other HV parts of an electric vehicle. It is made up of a large number of battery cells or packs to provide the energy required to power the vehicle -HV System Internal Schematic – within the HV battery system, there will be a variety of sensors, contactors, and other parts to support its health and function. The HV batteries themselves are insulated from the case and vehicle chassis. The HV battery outer case is electrically connected to the vehicle chassis. The low voltage system supplies the power for the battery management system to monitor and manage the high voltage battery contractors. Contractors are specially designed HV-rated relays that are turned on and off by the low voltage battery management system. When these contractors are open, there is no high voltage coming out of the battery -Contactors Safety Considerations – HV contactors have been known to malfunction in a closed state. It is not an intended design function, or common, but it has happened. When this happens, the high voltage is available to all parts connected to the HV battery buss. HV switching with contactors (HV relays) can experience arcing if opened under load. The power management system strategies will typically open and close the main contactors under low/no load conditions. This may not always be the case. If one of the control modules detects certain system faults, it may open the HV contactors -Electric Drive Motor – electric drive motors convert electrical energy into mechanical energy used to drive the vehicle’s wheels. Electric motors generate near-instant torque or turning force. This means they produce extremely fast acceleration compared to internal combustion engines -Electric Drive Motor Schematic – for improved safety, the electrical windings in the drive motor are insulated from the motor outer case. The case is electrically connected to the vehicle chassis -Electric Vehicle Controller – control modules monitor and manage the HV system integrity, operation, and performance. They communicate over the on-board network to manage the flow of energy within the HV system. Vehicle acceleration, regenerative braking, battery state of charge, thermal management, and many other functions are managed by these control modules. This could be thought of similar to the control modules in non-electric vehicles that manage engine, transmission, and other system operations -Electric Vehicle Controller Schematic – on-board control modules work together to integrate the different system operations. Each of the major system may have their separate control modules that interact with the EV control module. These control modules receive their power from the low voltage system via the 12-volt buss -High Voltage Isolation Monitor Schematic – there are built-in, self-test functions that monitor HV system integrity to detect high voltage leakage, loss of high voltage isolation to the chassis, and other possible faults of the HV system. When an issue is detected by these monitors, it may illuminate warning messages, set DTCs, limit vehicle operations, or disable the HV system completely. The specifics depend on system design and the nature or severity of the fault. -Safety Loop Circuits – HV systems typically include a low-current safety interlock (integrity) loop circuit. These safety loop circuits tie in with HV connectors, harnesses, and other system parts. If a fault is detected withing the safety loop circuit, the main contractors are opened removing power from the HV buss. If the contractors are already open, they are not allowed to close. This is usually a series circuit of linked connection points. If any connection opens up, it is detected by the monitoring control module. -Safety Disconnects – HV battery safety disconnects are designed to disable the HV battery prior to performing electric vehicle service. These are manually disconnected by a technician. The safety disconnects are plastic that do not conduct electricity. However, there are conductors in the disconnect. What if there is a small crack in the plastic and a small amount of moisture is present? Do you want to find out with your bare hand? Is that a risk you want to take? Electric vehicles may also have a special pyrotechnic safety disconnect. This is designed to open the HV circuit under certain conditions such as an airbag deployment. -Safety Disconnect Schematics – the HV battery safety disconnects is usually placed in series with the HV battery cells at the mid-point in the cell arrangement. When removed, no current can flow. It may also tie into the low current interlock loop safety system. When the safety disconnect is removed, there may be residual high voltage. This residual high voltage may remain in the system parts until it bleeds off via internal components designed for this purpose -Floating System Design – the high voltage system is considered a floating design. This means both the positive and the negative side of the power source and all interconnected parts of the HV systems are isolated from the chassis and body of the vehicle. The HV system parts are attached to the chassis, but the high voltage is well insulated within the case, wiring, connectors, and system parts -Electrical Bonding Schematic – electrical bonding is the practice of connecting all exposed metal items not designed to carry electricity to a common ground, although not ground for the HV system. This is done in an effort to mitigate electric shock, should there be an internal insulation failure in any HV module or part. The cases and housings of the HV parts are connected to the vehicle chassis ground. There may also be redundant ground (bonding) straps. This is an important part of HV system safety design. Vehicle makers have to conform to certain standards for HV isolation and safety. Robust engineering has gone into modern EVs to ensure these requirements are met. In the following screens, lets look at a few scenarios where HV system faults could potentially lead to electrical safety faults. -Electrical Bonding Scenario 1 – in this scenario the high voltage has a short to the chassis. With the floating HV system, if only one of the high voltage lines accidently connected with the chassis, there would only be a shock hazard if someone touched an exposed point on the other HV line. The HV monitor system should detect this fault -Electrical Bonding Scenario 2 – in this scenario, if both HV lines shorted to the chassis, the master fuse would open. This is due to the electrical bonding to the chassis of the vehicle, providing a direct short of the high voltage buss. Electrical bonding provides an uninterrupted path through the chassis, causing excessive current flow which will blow the fuse, disabling the high voltage circuit. The HV safety systems should prevent an electrical shock hazard as long as electrical bonding integrity is intact -Electrical Bonding Scenario 3 – if a fault occurred within module 1 and the electrical bonding to the chassis was not intact, the module case would then be at the potential of the high voltage line to which it was connected. If someone touches the module, there should not be a shock hazard, like a bird on a wire. In this scenario, there is another fault shorting the HV to the chassis as shown in module 2. The case of module 2 becomes the potential of the HV buss. With module 1 having a fault and the person touching module 1 and any metal part on the vehicle, the consequences could be deadly. While this is not likely to happen, is it a risk you are willing to take. -HV-Trained Service Technicians – vehicle makers have established polices and procedures that dictate only trained electrical HV service technicians can perform specific tasks. These tasks may include: -Performing inspections -Determining HV system integrity -Disabling HV systems -Servicing HV systems -Procedures typically require the use of visual safety indicators, and other measures are in place. The HV-trained service technician documents that the vehicle is safe for the collision repair technicians to work on the vehicle. Understanding Vehicle Communications Networks (1/2) Module 1 – Understanding Vehicle Communication Networks -Overview – a vehicle communication network manages information transfer between systems and modules to provide the functionality of different electronic systems on modern vehicles. Understanding the vehicle communication network is an important first step for improving the technicians diagnostic skill set -Early Electrical Systems – vehicle electrical systems have evolved throughout the history of the automobile. Early electrical systems were very basic and may have a generator, battery, fused links, wires, switches, relays, and load devices such as light bulbs or motors. In a lighting circuit, when the switch was turned to the ON position, the contacts on the circuit closed and current flowered to the lights connected to that switch -The Introduction of Electronic Control Modules – eventually electronic modules started to appear in vehicles, controlling the engine and eventually the transmission, climate control, anti-lock brakes (ABS), supplemental restraint systems (SRS), lighting, and more. Electronic control modules may be referred to as an electronic control unit (ECU) or simply as a vehicle computer -Electronic Control – with electronic control, when the driver turns the light switch to the ON position, the switch is an input device to a control module. The module then carries out the request to activate the lights, usually by energizing a relay that completes the circuit, providing power to the lights. Electronic control modules are computers dedicated to a function or system. Electronic control modules monitor sensors, switches, and data, possibly from other modules. They perform the required function based on the programming of the module. -Powertrain Control Module Example – think of each module like a building with an entrance door and an exit door. The entrance door provides inputs, and the exit door provides the requested or programmed outputs. For example, the powertrain control module (PCM) monitors different inputs, processes the information, and controls outputs to obtain desired engine performance -Multiple Inputs – on a vehicle equipped with an internal combustion engine, the PCM monitors various input sensors to control the engine management system. Commonly used input sensors monitor: -Oxygen -Engine coolant temperature -Mass airflow -Manifold absolute pressure -Throttle position -PCM Processing – the PCM monitors the input sensors and can make changes to the outputs based on changing conditions. It contains an electronically erasable, programmable, read-only memory (EEPROM). The EEPROM contains operating parameter information, as well as programming, to control engine operation. The PCM also communicates with other systems and performs diagnostic testing on itself and the various system sensors and parts. -Outputs – the PCM controls various output devices to obtain proper operation of the engine management system. The various outputs can include: -Ignition coils -Fuel injectors -Fuel pump relays -Variable valve timing -Throttle control -Other powertrain parameters -Control Module Communication – -There are a variety of sensors and devices that provide input to computers, including: -Variable resistors. These may be air and fluid temperatures, pressure, or position -Voltage or frequency generating sensors -Switches -Acceleration sensors -Rotary optical position sensors -Yaw rate sensors -Others depending on the equipped vehicle systems and options -The computer relies on the accuracy of the information provided by the input devices to control the output devices. For example, if the coolant temperature sensor is not providing accurate information, the engine may overheat due to the computers failure to activate the radiator cooling fan -Module Power, Ground, and Reference Voltage – for reliable operation, computers require a stable supply of voltage and good ground connections. Some computers have an internal voltage regulator that provides a precise reference voltage to its sensors that give input information. The battery and charging system must function as designed for any computerized system to operate properly and have a consistent and accurate reference voltage. Check supply voltage, grounds, and verify reference voltage is within specifications -Networked Control Modules – with the increased number and complexity of vehicle systems, the amount of wiring needed increases. This impacts the weight of the vehicle. Modern networking reduces the amount of wiring necessary as well as the number of isolated systems. By reducing the number of individually isolated systems, diagnostic communications are streamlined. Computer modules and the systems they support are all connected so they can talk to each other and share data -Control Module Priority- one challenge for electronic system engineers was to devise a way to manage communication traffic among all the connected computer modules. They also had to program the network so that information or operation of certain systems and modules had a higher priority. Communication protocols and specifications were set up for network signal levels, validation, and arbitration methods. These communication standards simplified the process for modules to communicate and understand message priorities across the network -CAN Bus Communication System – networking, or connecting modules together, is accomplished using two wires twisted together to reduce outside electromagnetic interference. Serial data is created. This data contains an electronic message formatted with identification and validation information at the beginning, embedded data in the middle, and followed by an end of message flag. The two-wire network sends data so other modules that need this information can receive it. This controller area network is often referred to as the CAN bus. Just like a city bus delivers passengers, the CAN bus delivers data from one place to another. A typical CAN communication system may incorporate a low-speed and high-speed bus network -Multiplexing – -Multiplexing refers to multiple computers and modules sharing a communication bus. Modern vehicles typically have multiple networks and related buses that focus on different systems of a vehicle. Examples of different CANs may include: -Powertrain -Convenience systems -Infotainment -Safety -Some vehicles may have a media-oriented systems transport (MOST) bus that supports data rates needed for multimedia operations, such as audio, video, voice, and data signals. Another communications bus that can support higher data speeds is FlexRay -Local Interconnect Network – a local interconnect network (LIN) may be used in a hierarchy of network configurations, where LIN-based networks serve as subnetworks to a primary CAN. Working along with the CAN, the LIN-based networks may then reduce the load on the CAN. The LIN is a lower-speed protocol used to provide local communications within a functionality group. For example, the network that communicates occupant classification system (OCS) module data to the restraints control module (RCM) may use a LIN -Gateway Modules – networks may have certain modules in charge as domain masters. These domain masters oversee the operations within a particular area, such as powertrain, infotainment, safety, and advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS). Other modules connected to the domain master are referred to as nodes. Gateway modules may be used to manage communications and the diagnostic interface. Regardless of the system, network communication relies on the fundamental electrical principles of voltage, resistance, and current. If there is damage to the CAN harness or connectors, communication may be limited to the electronic control units that remain connected and functioning on the network -The Network Information Highway – on newer vehicles there will be more than one CAN bus. The network wiring harness is made up of two wires that represent the CAN high and CAN low signals. The wires are twisted to minimize interference from other electronic signals. To reduce noise and minimize signal ringing or echoes on the CAN bus, there are two resistors that may be referred to as termination resistors. They are most commonly 120 ohms and placed across CAN high and CAN low at the ends of the bus. Two 120-ohn resistors are in parallel, and the total network resistance is 60 ohms. Knowing this value is useful when troubleshooting the bus. These resistors are often inside a module. -The Network Sensors – along the span of the CAN bus are various sensor, system modules, and controllers. Sensors provide input for the controller modules. System modules consist of input, output, or power modules that are controller by controller modules. Two node lines connect the ECMs to the CAN bus harness -Types of CAN Bus Networks -Low-Speed – a low speed CAN bus communication network communicates on an average of 33.33 kilobits per second (kbps) -Mid-Speed – a mid-speed CAN bus communication network is a dual-wire network that communicates at approximately 95.2 kbps. This network is commonly used for entertainment systems, such as the radio, and transmits large quantities of data in a short period of time -High-Speed – a high speed CAN bus communication network is a dual-wire network that communicates at approximately 500 kbps. This network is used for real-time data for safety, powertrain, and chassis systems -Flexible Data Rate – CAN flexible data-rate (FD) is used on some vehicle networks to meet the needs of increased data transfer rates. The CAN FD can transfer data up to five times faster. Using CAN FD, the ECUs can switch to different data rates to send larger or smaller messages. With CAN FD you can use the 11-bit identifier like Classical CAN, or the 29-bit identifier of the FD extended frame format (FEFF). Classical CAN was limiting activities with its 1 megabit per second (Mbps) transfer rate. Faster communication is needed for ECU flashing, ADAS, electric vehicle (EV), infotainment, and head-up display (HUD) applications. CAN FD can support rates higher than 8 mbps as well as payloads up to 64 bits of data as compared to 8 bits in CAN -Private CAN – some vehicle systems have a very high demand for certain modules or sensors. When a system needs to have fast, uninterrupted communication with a module or sensor, the vehicle may have a private CAN. This allows some modules to have real-time updates to deliver information more accurately either to the driver or to other parts of the vehicle to take action if the driver does not. This can commonly be found on ADAS and may also be used on other systems -Interface Bus – the interface bus is the two-wire twisted pair that connects all the control modules when there is more than one data bus. The interface bus has two 120-ohm resistors and a total resistance of 60 ohms. If you encounter a situation where multiple controller modules are not communication, then there is likely damage to the interface bus -Parallel CAN Buses – if there are only two CAN buses, they can run in parallel with the use of two control modules. The network diagram displayed shows both high-speed (HS-CAN) and mid-speed (MS-CAN) buses Understanding Vehicle Communications Networks (2/2) Module 2 – What’s in a Code -System Codes – DTCs are used to notify technicians about system faults. Each DTC corresponds to a fault detected in the vehicle. When a current or history fault is detected, a corresponding trouble code is activated. A vehicle stores the trouble code in its memory when it detects a part or system that is operating outside of acceptable limits -Different Code Types – active codes identify current problems with the vehicle. Pending codes occur when a potential issue has been identified in the system and may require several occurrences before it goes active. Codes may be stored in a vehicle computer as history codes. A history code is a DTC from a fault that was detected but is currently functioning a fault. History codes may be retained by the computer for access. These codes may show a failure history of a part of a vehicle system and may indicate issues relevant to the current repair -Diagnostic Trouble Codes Overview – even though DTC standardization has improved, frequently technicians must research codes to verify their meaning. While some codes have common formats and are shared among several vehicle makers, many other codes are specific to the vehicle maker. Never assume a code from one vehicle is the same on another vehicle -Diagnostic Trouble Codes Explained- -On-board diagnostic-II (OBD-II) mandates standardized DTCs. All DTCs consist of one letter and a four-digit number. The letter signifies the system that contains the fault: -B-body -C-chassis -P-powertrain -U-communications -The number associations are: -First digit – generic or manufacturer-specific DTC -Second digit – vehicle system setting the fault -Third and fourth digits – system part or section containing the fault -Diagnostic Trouble Code Example – for example, a P0300 code is a powertrain system fault that indicates an engine misfire that is not related to only one cylinder. If the last digit was a number other than 0, it would correspond to the cylinder number that is misfiring. If the first digit was a 1, this would be an OEM code -Where to Find Code Identifiers – service information from the vehicle maker is the most reliable resource for identifying DTCs. Internet search engines can also be useful for finding code identifiers and their descriptions. Many OEM-specific codes have more than six digits. These additional digits may identify specific failure types or other information the vehicle maker may include -Freeze Frame Data – freeze frame data that captures relevant data at the time the code was set may be available. Additional information may identify key cycles since the code set, mileage, or time and date information. Module replacement may be required due to the way some collision-related fault codes are stored and then retained in the computer memory. They cannot be erased. This is usually associated with SRS control modules -Network Communication – vehicle network communications are standardized to allow electronic devices to readily communicate with one another. Unlike some office or computer networks, standards in vehicle design ensure communication remains continuous, even if parts of the network fail. Vehicle diagnostic connectors are also standardized so that scan tools can support many vehicle brands. Security measures are being implemented to address activities or attacks and may require specific interface tooling to access the network or protect some functions of the vehicle -Common Standards – in terms of automotive networks, there are two key organizations that assist with the development of common standards. Engineers in the automotive industry design networks using standards from both the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE). OEM data sheets commonly list these ISO and SAE codes. However, they have no relevance for the technician – these are simply protocols or standards used by engineers who develop the broadcast messages sent over the data bus. -Vehicle Diagnostic Connector – a standardized data link connector (DLC) is required on all OBD-II vehicles. The scan tool uses this port to allow an interface for viewing codes, live data, programming, parameters, and more. This connector contains 16 terminals and must be located under the dash on the driver side of the passenger compartment. The CAN bus always uses pins 6 and 14. When inspecting a vehicle, check to ensure this connector is in proper location and in good condition. Some communication bus protocols may use other pins on the DLC -Reviewing the Scan Report -when possible, pre-scan a collision-damaged vehicle using a scan tool. This initial check can often provide a variety of DTCs on the scan report. While this list can be very intimidating, technicians are able to quickly evaluate faults by reviewing the initial DTCs. Then they can prioritize among the most common areas of concern. Communication networks often produce redundant codes. In other words, one or more of the codes listed on a scan report may point to the same diagnostic concern. A careful visual inspection of collision-damaged areas of the vehicle may lead to a common root cause -Interpreting Multiple Codes – damage to electrical wiring can cause multiple codes. For example, if a CAN HI wire is cut, multiple DTCs may be set. When performing a scan, it may appear that the fuel level sensor (Circuit A) has a fault, the fuel level sensor (Circuit B) has a fault, and there is a problem with multiple vehicle systems. It is unlikely that these circuits and modules are all faulty, so the next step is to determine what these codes have in common. In this example, the technician researched the problem. Through careful visual inspection, the common factor was damage to the CAN harness. If a broken wire is located, reference the vehicle-maker repair procedures to make the repair -Understand the Systems – if there is a fault detected in one system, it is possible that there will be additional codes set in other systems. Due to multiple DTCs being set, even if there is a single problem, a technician may think there is more than one issue. If there are multiple modules reporting U codes for no communication or invalid data, look to see if they are indicating a common module in which the problem may reside. That system may be the root cause Using Vehicle Maker Repair Procedures (1/2) Module 1 – Repair Information Availability -Introduction to OEM Repair Procedures – with all the new technology built into todays vehicles, collision damage estimating and repair have become more challenging. Because it is important to provide complete, accurate, and safe repairs, estimators and repair technicians need to know how to access and use the appropriate OEM service information. Knowing how to locate and effectively use service information makes the damage estimating and repair processes as efficient as possible -Importance of Using OEM Repair Procedures – vehicle service information sources provide information such as diagnostic and repair procedures necessary to achieve complete and accurate repairs. When analyzing damage, the appropriate service information helps to determine the extent of damage. This helps identify if the vehicle can be safely and economically repaired -Repair Information – repair information includes details for damage analysis, repairs, and parts replacement. The information provides recommended removal and attachment methods and locations: -This may also include: -Mechanical repairs or parts replacement -Electrical repairs or parts replacement -Wiring diagrams -Parts and systems diagnostics -Repair information provides: -Personal safety precautions and recommended safety equipment -Vehicle protection guidelines -Considerations for refinishing -Handling and storage of hazardous materials -Determine Requirements – access service information at the time of the estimate -Before blueprinting -Before removing parts -Before beginning repairs -Throughout the blueprinting and repair processes -Determine which service information is required to complete a repair. Be aware that OEMs may provide position statements for certain repair procedures. However, position statements do not take the place of service information for making the repairs. Vehicles are constructed from various types of materials, including steel, aluminum, and plastic. Determine the type of material used for a specific part by accessing the appropriate service information. The service information may also provide the various attachment methods used for the original construction and repairs of these vehicle -Vehicle-Specific Service Information – access the service information for the make, model, and year of the vehicle. There may be slight design variations for different model years even though body styles are not different. Always refer to the service information for the year of the vehicle in question. The service information provides the specific procedure and parts required and helps develop a repair plan -Access Appropriate Sources – determine whether accessing the information electronically or using printed material would be more convenient. Some vehicle makers may also offer CD-ROMs. In situations where there is no computer access in the work area, print the service information to have a copy at the workstation. Some electronic service information may also be downloadable for access at a later time. Printed copies or downloaded files of electronic service information can be cataloged for future use or reference. File it with the repair order. before referencing any previously printed material, downloaded material, or CD-ROMs, verify that it is still current -Web-Based Sources – there are various online sources available for accessing vehicle service information. Access to some vehicle maker websites may require using a specific operating system and web browser. For example, some websites work with the Windows operating system only and require the Internet Explorer web browser. Some websites are available free of charge and some are fee-based. Fee-based websites may offer several subscription options. The subscriptions are for a set time period, such as 24 or 72 hours, 31 days, or one year. Subscription rates vary depending on the vehicle maker -Navigating a Website – navigation for each vehicle maker website varies. Some vehicle makers provide tutorials to show how to effectively navigate their website. There may be options for selecting service information in different languages. Along with English, information may be available in other languages, such as French or Spanish. A vehicle maker service and repair website may be a separate site from the collision repair website. For example, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) has a website that offers vehicle-specific collision repair information. This free website provides technical collision repair information for a number of late model FCA vehicles. FCA also has a more comprehensive fee-based website that include all the mechanical and body repair information for each make and model vehicle -Technical Service Bulletins – vehicle makers issue technical service bulletins (TSBs) to provide new or updated service information. A TSB is issued when there are multiple occurrences of a problem on a vehicle make or a model. TSBs are not recalls. TSBs may be called by a different name, such as collision repair information bulletin or service advisory. Access TSBs on the vehicle makers service information website. Some TSBs are also published in vehicle maker newsletters, such as Ford’s On Target, and Toyota’s Collision Pros -Special Publications – special publications are available. Some subjects include plastic repair, weld bonding, and paint materials. Emergency response guidelines may provide service information regarding restraint systems and hybrid vehicle systems; however, they do not replace service information. These publications help make rescue situations safer for emergency response personnel. Download these guides from the vehicle maker website. A vehicle owners manual can be another source of technical service information. Depending on the vehicle maker, owners manuals provide information such as: -System functions -Parts locations with illustrations -Fluid capacities -Replacement bulb sizes -Other Websites – there are other websites that may be helpful for finding collision repair information. Two examples are: -ALLDATA -Mitchell -The ALLDATA and Mitchell websites provide detailed diagnostics and repair information sourced from vehicle makers. A subscription is required to gain access to the repair information. With ALLDATA, although the information is copyrighted by the vehicle maker, they have an agreement to distribute it. ALLDATA information contains the actual OEM articles and diagrams with no editorial or content changes. ALLDATA changes the format only into one standardized layout or consistent navigating. For information on how to use ALLDATA, check out the I-CAR Collision Repair News article: Step-By-Step: Accessing ALLDATA Collision Information -OEM Service Information Websites – another information source is the National Automotive Service Task Force (NASTF) website. This website provides information and links to OEM repair websites, including a subscription price list -I-CAR Website and RTS Portal – the I-CAR website is a good source for accessing information and training opportunities that support vehicle maker service procedures. The I-CAR website include a path to I-CAR Repairability Technical Support (RTS) which is found under the Technical Knowledge tab. The RTS Portal is subscription-based, or access is free when a shop or individual participates at a certain level of I-CAR training. With access to the I-CAR RTS Portal, technicians, appraisers, owners, and shop managers gain a research department for the information that is hard to find or needs clarification. -RTS Ask I-CAR and Linking Pin Activity – through the Ask I-CAR feature, the Technical Support team takes questions about specific collision repair information. While the Technical Support team cannot send out vehicle maker repair procedures, due to copyright laws, they can verify if the information exists. In response to industry feedback, the RTS website include a video demo with most OEM service information links showing how to navigate that website. RTS subscribers also gain a path to the vehicle makers through the OEM Linking Pin Activity. That means that if the Technical Support team cant find the information requested, they will contact the vehicle maker directly -I-CAR Training – I-CAR training courses available for purchase are a valuable reference to vehicle maker service procedures. I-CAR training courses are designed for use in conjunction with vehicle maker service information. Proper training is helpful for understanding service information. Depending on the course, I-CAR training is available: -Online -Line in class (welding, training and certification and hands-on skills development) -Virtual Test 1-All of these are true about accessing an OEM repair procedure EXCEPT it: is started after the blueprinting process 2-Before using previously printed service information-verify that the information is current 3-A vehicle makers position statement can be used in place of service information for making certain repairs – false 4-Vehicle makers issue technical service bulletins to provide new service information-true 5-All of these statements are true about requesting information from the I-CAR RTS Technical Support team EXCEPT – the RTS team will verify if the requested information exists – X wrong Using Vehicle Maker Repair Procedures (2/2) Module 2 -Using an OEM Repair Procedure -Repairs – vehicle makers provide the necessary information required for a specific repair. Repair information may include items such as the recommended removal and installation steps and attachment methods. Service information may also include information for repairing a particular type of material such as steel, aluminum, or plastic. GM and FCA are examples of vehicle makers that provide recommended procedures for repairing plastic parts -Refinishing – OEM repair websites may provide refinishing information. Accessing the information may help determine approved refinish materials for a repair. These materials may be included in the repair information or available as a separate manual. Paint code label locations are also identified -Parts Replacement – part replacement information can be found in various sources. Some parts catalogs are available in printed manuals and some vehicle maker service information websites provide online parts catalogs. Service information may show illustrations of replacement parts along with part numbers for ordering specific parts. Some parts allow replacement of the inner or outer structure and others require replacement of the complete assembly. Accessing the service information. -Service Information Terms – depending on the vehicle maker, terms used to identify service procedures, parts, products, or equipment can vary. It is important for estimators and technicians to be aware that differences in terms exist. Understanding terms used in specific service information sources can help with locating and using the information. Strut tower assemblies, which include the apron panel, may also be called wheelhouse panels. Rocker panels are also called side sill panels or simply sills. If available, refer to the specific vehicle maker service information glossary for definitions of acronyms and terms -Personal Safety and Vehicle Protection – service information sources typically include cautions, warnings, and notices, in various locations. These are presented to reduce the risk of personal injury or further damage to the vehicle. It is important to read and understand all personal safety and vehicle protection information -Special Tools and Materials – service information may provide information about special tools, products, and equipment that will be required to complete a repair. Instructions for using tools and materials may also be provided. This information may show or list specific locations of material types. Repair procedure pages may include links to material usage charts. These charts may include material types and strengths, or the repairability of certain parts -Measurement Information – service information may include point-to-point measurements such as underbody, under hood, and side aperture opening dimensions. Frame measuring systems provide three-dimensional frame and body measurements for most vehicles. Estimating and measuring systems can also identify point-to-point measurements -Sectioning Information – for recommended sectioning procedures, refer to the vehicle-specific service information. Sectioning locations may be indicated with dotted lines in a general area of a part or a specific location. Some procedures include measurements -Fastener Information – most vehicle maker service information sources provide torque specifications for installing parts. Torque specification units provided in the service information can vary. Specifications may be provided in metric and standard units. A vehicle maker may designate some fasteners one-time-use, and this is included in the service information -Parts Information – use service information to determine how parts are serviced and types of replacement parts. Some service information sources give exploded view illustrations that can help establish if a part is available separately or if it is only available as an assembly. Individual or diagram may be linked to more detailed information sources -Recommended Steps – vehicle maker service information typically provides the specified steps to follow for body, collision, or mechanical repairs. Photos and illustrations are used to help identify parts or locations applicable to the procedure. Icons identify specific tools, products, or procedures that apply. Service information may have links or threads to new pages or screens that provide more detailed information or additional steps for a procedure. Follow all links or threads to ensure access to the complete information -Repair Procedure Information – some repair procedures may only be available with the replacement parts. Additionally, be aware that collision repair information may or may not be included in the body repair information section found in service manuals. Body repair focuses on removal and installation of bolt-on parts such as trim, exterior panels, bumpers, and restraints. Collision repair information typically shows how to repair, section, or straighten outer body panels and the body structure. This information may be in a separate section -Special Product Requirements – service information may indicate when special products are required for a repair along with special instructions for applications. These include products such as: -Seam sealers -Adhesives -Paint materials -Foams -Corrosion Protection -Generally, following the product makers instructions. Service information identifies original applications and locations -Special Tool Requirements – service information indicates when specific tools, or equipment are required to properly repair certain parts or systems. These may include: -Electronic parts alignment -Calibration tools and equipment -Frame repair equipment -Riveting tools -Systems such as a blind spot detection or other advanced driver assistance systems may require calibration when damaged parts or attachments are repaired or replaced. Some of these calibration procedures require the use of special tools. OEMs require using vehicle-specific scan tools -Flowcharts – performing some procedures may include following a flowchart. Flowcharts are written for mechanical problems. Flowcharts contain questions and statements designed to guide the technician through a systematic troubleshooting sequence. These include specific tasks such as electrical tests or yes and no questions to make decisions based on information gained. Reading through the complete flowchart before proceeding helps avoid unnecessary steps in the process -Electronic Service Information – electronic service information format varies. Most provide a drop-down content list or menu for navigating to specific information. Navigating vehicle maker websites can typically be done by selecting the vehicle make, model, and year. Then select the desired category of information or a specific procedure. The service information where specific procedures are displayed may link to related information. Other websites may use keywords for content searches, symbols and icons, a help option, and using the vehicle identification number (VIN). Most vehicle maker service information websites will offer a help option that can be used to get tips for navigating the site. Depending on the website, there may be an e-mail contact field that can be used to send questions or comments for specific assistance needs -Symbols and Icons – it is important to understand what the symbols and icons used in the service information represent. For example, some symbols may be used for the weld method or type of weld required Test 1-service information may show illustrations with part numbers for ordering replacement parts – true 2-vehicle makers use the same standard terms to identify service procedures, parts, products, or equipment – false 3-Torque specifications may be provided in metric and which of these units – universal – X wrong 4-vehicle maker service information typically provides the specified steps to follow our body, collision, or mechanical repairs – true 5-a flowchart may include yes and no questions to guide through a systematic troubleshooting sequence-true Vehicle Check-In Process Vehicle intake -Receiving the Vehicle – the vehicle check-in process is one of the first steps in the repair process. Vehicles may arrive at a repair shop by: -Tow-in -Insurance/DRP assignment -Walk-in -Note: Regardless of how the vehicle arrives at the repair shop, the customer’s first impression could influence their feelings about the entire claim experience. When making initial customer contact, either over the phone for tow-in or face-to-face for drivable DRP and walk-in customers, it is important to show empathy and remember that the customer has gone through a traumatic experience. Ensure the vehicle keys have been collected, including any keys for theft-deterrent devices. -Tow-In – when a vehicle arrives as a tow-in, it will be necessary to contact the vehicle owner to: -Obtain any missing customer ID information -Obtain details about how the damage occurred -Obtain insurance company (payer) information -Explain the blueprinting process -Obtain the necessary repair authorization -Set customer expectations -Note: In some cases, towed-in vehicles have been pre-arranged by the insurance company or vehicle owner, and towing expenses may have been pre-paid. However, in many cases, towing expenses are not pre-paid, or the shop has made towing arrangements, and a towing invoice will need to be paid. In some cases, the repair facility may have billing arrangements with a preferred towing vendor that allows for towing invoices to be signed and then processed like other payables. -Insurance/DRP Assignment – a vehicle may arrive at the repair shop as a result of a Direct Repair Program (DRP) assignment. This means the customer has been in contact with their insurance company and chosen a specific repair shop to inspect and provide an estimate of vehicle damages or to drop the vehicle off for repairs. In either case, it will be necessary to obtain or confirm all customer contact information, insurance company contact information, vehicle identification number, and facts of loss from the customer. Even if the customer was in for an estimate before dropping their vehicle off for repairs, it is a good practice to review the customer and insurance company information with them. This ensures nothing has changed since the original estimate was written. Repairs should be scheduled depending on the available production shop capacity and insurance partner guidelines. -Walk-In – walk-in customers are those customers that arrive at the repair shop without a scheduled estimate or repair appointment. In these cases, the customer interaction will be very similar to a DRP customer, who arrives without a written estimate. It will be necessary to obtain or confirm all customer and insurance company contact information, vehicle identification information, and facts of loss from the customer. It may also be necessary to schedule the customer to return for their estimate or repairs based on estimator and repair shop capacity. -Initial Vehicle Inspection and Walk-Around – the vehicle walk-around is used to establish a relationship and build trust with your customer. It is also used to gather facts about the collision, get an overview of primary damages, and look for signs of secondary damages. -Reviewing the Facts of Loss – while completing your walk-around with the customer, it is important to obtain information about the facts of the loss to gain an understanding of impact the vehicle sustained during the collision. During the walk-around, ask the customer about: -The impact source -The speed of the impact -The road conditions at the time of the collision -Brake usage during the condition -Unusual noises such as clunking, rubbing, or rattling -Unusual mechanical issues such as vibrations, pulling, or drivability issues -Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) that do not appear to be functioning properly such as park assist, lane keep assist, or head up display -Note: Understanding the details of the collision aids in evaluating the potential for energy transfer through the vehicle. There will be a difference in the amount of energy transferred when hitting another vehicle vs. a stationary object such as a tree -Confirming Vehicle Damage – another part of the vehicle walk-around with the customer includes the identification of any unrelated, prior damage to the vehicle. This includes prior collision damage, parking lot dings, etc. This is an important piece of the walk-around process, as identifying these types of damage prior to starting repairs will help to ensure all parties are on the same page with regard to repairs to be completed. This also provides an opportunity to sell the customer your services for any additional unrelated damages. In many cases, it is more cost effective for the customer to complete these unrelated damage repairs while completing the claim-related repairs due to overlapping operations. -Vehicle Information – during the initial inspection, ensure that the necessary vehicle information is collected. This will provide confirmation that the correct vehicle is being inspected. Documentation of the vehicle’s trim and options will allow for accurate parts selection when preparing the repair estimate. When identifying a vehicle, record the: -Vehicle identification number (VIN) -Year/make/model/production date of the vehicle -Current mileage -Body style/color/trim codes -Vehicle options -License number -Drivetrain information – this includes identifying the engine type and size, and the transmission type. -Conduct Customer Consultation – after the vehicle walk-around is completed, the details of the initial inspection and conversation with the customer should be documented and reviewed. This helps ensure the customer understands what was discussed and is in agreement with all the information that was covered. -Related vs. Unrelated Damage – during your customer consultation following the walk-around, it is important to review all of the unrelated damages to ensure there is no confusion about which damages are being repaired. Also, document the vehicle condition at the time of check-in. this ensures there is no confusion or frustration for the customer when the vehicle is ready for delivery. Note: For tow-in vehicles, the vehicle inspection and walk around can be done without the customer. However, the customer should be contacted following your walk-around to conduct your customer consultation and discuss the results. -Payment Responsibilities – it is also important to review the claim details and confirm the parties responsible for payment. For example, if the vehicle owner is the insured party, there will likely be a deductible the customer will be responsible for, along with payment for any unrelated damages upsold to the customer. Having this discussion with the customer prior to starting any repairs helps to eliminate the possibility of misunderstanding and frustration after repairs have been completed -Communication Preferences – during the conversation with the customer, it is always a good idea to review the facilities status update process with the customer. This may include confirming the customers preference for frequency of status updates, and confirming the preferred method of contact such as phone, text, email, etc. Note: At this time, it is also a good practice to encourage the removal of personal items from the vehicle -Reviewing the Next Steps – before concluding the consultation with the customer, review the next step in the repair process, which is the blueprinting process. Inform the customer that they should expect a call when blueprinting is complete to discuss the damages identified, necessary repairs, and target completion date. Review the blueprinting process with the customer so they understand that this is the first stage of the production shop repair process. In this stage, the vehicle is completely disassembled in the area(s) of damage, including any necessary trim removal for the refinish process. Disassembly helps ensure all of the collision damage is identified, resulting in a more efficient repair process. -Coordinate Customer Rental – speak with the vehicle owner to determine if a rental vehicle will be required during the repair process. If a rental is required, determine who will be responsible for payment and coordinate with a preferred vendor for a rental vehicle to be available for the customer. -Customer Comfort Items – the customer may be required to spend time waiting for their scheduled appointment or waiting for a rental car. It is a good business practice to have a comfortable waiting area. Some best practices for customer waiting areas include: -Being clean and professional -Having adequate seating -Having a clean restroom that is separate from the restroom used by employees -Having basic refreshments such as coffee, water, etc. -Documenting Customer Contact – it is important to note any time there is any communication with the vehicle owner, including notes from your walk-around, customer consultation, and any other points of contact or communication throughout the entire repair process. Communication notes should include: -Date and time the communication took place -Purpose of the communication -Name of the person who received the communication on the part of the customer. -Communication type (phone, text, email) including the phone number or email address used. -Note: Detailed communication records help to eliminate any confusion about what was discussed, when it was discussed, and actions agreed upon. Inspecting the Vehicle -Completing the Vehicle Intake Process – when finalizing the vehicle intake process, there are a few steps that should be taken to prepare the vehicle for the repair process -Inspect for Biohazards – it is important to inspect all vehicles for biohazards before getting into the vehicle or starting the damage analysis/blueprinting process. Inspect the vehicle for common biohazards including bool, needles, and mold. Follow the proper safety procedures for handling any biohazard. -Determine Drivability – before attempting to drive a vehicle that has been checked-in for repairs, look closely to identify any damages to safety and mechanical systems. Damage to these systems may make the vehicle unsafe to drive in the parking lot or into the shop, Some examples of items that, if damaged, could make the vehicle unsafe to drive includes: -Deployed airbags -Brake or steering system damage, which could result in loss of control -Cut or exposed wires, which could result in a short -Note: If damages are identified that could make the vehicle unsafe to drive, it is recommended the vehicle be pushed or towed into the repair shop. -Photo Documentation – before moving the vehicle into the blueprint department and beginning any disassembly, it is important to ensure all necessary pre-repair photos have been obtained. Some of the required photos may include: -Four corner photos, showing the license plate on the rear corners -Damage height measurement photos -Closeup photos of the damages -Interior photos, instrument panel photos, showing radio/GPS options -Driver door panel photos, showing power options -Headliner/sunroof photos -Engine compartment photos -Tread depth measurement photos, showing all tires -Prior damage photos -In-Shop Vehicle Identification – before staging the vehicle for the blueprinting process, it is a good practice to mark the vehicle using the shop standard operating procedures (SOPs) for vehicle identification. While in the shop, vehicles may be identified by key and mirror tags, on-vehicle mapping, or colored hats, among others. -Key/Mirror Tags and On-Vehicle Mapping – key/mirror tags and on-vehicle mapping are the most common forms of vehicle identification used in most collision repair shops. This requires simply attaching a tag to the vehicle keys and rearview mirror with a number that corresponds with the work order number. Then, mark the designated glass with additional identifying marks based on the shop SOPs. -Colored Hats – hats are another form of identification used in some shops. These hats are typically color-coded and used to provide a simple visual indicator for many different things. For example, the colored hats may include: -A stage in the repair process -A vehicle is waiting for parts -A vehicle is ready for production -A vehicle is a quick hit or fast lane repair -The insurance partner -The production team -Repair Authorization and Direction of Payment – remember to obtain any necessary signatures from the vehicle owner authorizing the repair shop to complete repairs. In some cases, shops may require a direction of payment form to be signed. This form authorizes the insurance company to pay the shop directly for services rendered. Always refer to your shop SOPs to identify procedures regarding obtaining repair authorization and direction of payment. Vehicle Construction Material Types (1/2) Materials in Vehicle Design -Vehicles are Different – vehicles are built differently now than in the past. Regulations require vehicle construction that provides improved occupant protection and vehicle performance. Vehicle design has changed to meet both National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) crash standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards. New design technologies used in the construction have to be strong, yet lighter, to provide the required improvements. To achieve better occupant protection, construction materials need to be stronger. For example, stronger side panel assemblies are necessary to improve side impact protection and roof crush resistance. To achieve rollover safety requirements, higher strength materials are being used in the A- and B-pillars, and roof rails. Vehicles are built for performance, which includes better fuel economy and lower emissions. Use of stronger steel provides increased passenger protection and better fuel economy. To achieve better fuel economy, vehicles have to be lighter, which requires using lighter-weight construction materials -Roof Crush Resistance – roof crush resistance requirements are from Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) 216. This standard establishes strength requirements for the passenger compartment roof to reduce deaths and injuries due to the crushing of the roof into the occupant compartment in rollovers. Previous requirements called for a roof crush resistance of 1.5 times the vehicle weight. Current requirements call for a roof crush resistance of 3.0 times the vehicle weight. Another testing organization, the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS), requires a roof crush resistance of 4.0 times the vehicle weight to achieve a “Good” rating. The IIHS rating is only a consumer advisory, not a regulation -Crash Protection Rating – the NHTSA New Car Assessment Program (NCAP) provides a motor vehicle crash test rating system to consumers using a star rating system, from 1 to 5 stars, with 5 being the highest, or best rating. This system also provides a measure of the relative safety potential of vehicles in collisions. Vehicle crash ratings are a product of the construction materials and design of the vehicle. Vehicle repairs should maintain the original crash rating. Ask yourself how many stars are you willing to comprise? In other words, will a 5-star rated vehicle provide 5-star collision protection following repairs? -Collision Energy Management – the use of high strength steel or aluminum may affect the distribution of collision energy and the spread of the resulting damage. This is achieved in part by absorbing and/or transferring the collision energy. Parts may be designed to -Absorb collision energy through the use of collapse or crush zones -Transfer collision energy through the type of forming process used, and the use of higher strength materials, such as hot-stamped boron-alloyed steel parts, and/or reinforced parts Why is Identification Important -importance of Material Identification – because various types of construction materials have different repair considerations, it is more important than ever to identify the material being repaired. Identification may be necessary to determine. -Appropriate removal and attachment tools, equipment, and/or techniques that may be required. -The appropriate repair or replace decisions. Different repair practices are required when repairing higher strength steel or aluminum panels compared to carbon fiber panels -Limits of repairability -Vehicle Construction Materials – this screen shows examples of vehicle construction materials having characteristics designed to provide higher strength, while also providing reduced weight. These materials include: -Higher-strength steel -Aluminum -Magnesium -Carbon fiber AHSS – top left Aluminum – top right Magnesium – bottom left Carbon fiber – bottom right -Material Applications – various types of materials may be used anywhere on a vehicle -Common Applications – the type of material may differ for the same part on different vehicles or models. In this example, there are four radiator core supports provided from different vehicle makers and, depending on the vehicle, the support may be made from high-strength steel, aluminum, magnesium or carbon fiber. Another example of a part that may be made from most of these advanced materials is an engine cradle, which is commonly constructed from steel, aluminum or magnesium. It is becoming more common for vehicle makers to use a variety of materials on any one structure. The specific material used is selected to best fit the design requirements of a specific application. Because of this, it is important to know how to identify the material used on the part being inspected Steel – Jeep Grand Cherokee – top left Magnesium – Ford F-150 – top right Aluminum – Mercedes Benz E Class – bottom left Carbon Fiber – Nissan GT-R – bottom right Material Identification Methods -How are Materials Identified – it is important to use the current vehicle service information for complete and accurate material identification. -Service Information – the type of material used for a specific part may be identified in the service information, which may include OEM or independent service information sources. Depending on the source, the material may be identified as a general or specific type of material. For example, a steel part may be identified as a zinc-coated steel part; a mild, high-strength steel part; or, categorized by type and strength, such as dual-phase (DP) 980. * Service information may have design variations for different model years, even if the body style has not significantly changed. Always refer to the appropriate service information for the model year and build date of the vehicle in question -OEM Procedures – accessing repair procedures should be part of the repair planning process. OEM procedures are developed with vehicle design and specific construction materials taken into consideration. OEM procedures can be accessed from the vehicle maker’s service information websites. Most OEM service information is subscription-based. Links to OEM service information can be accessed from the I-CAR website -Internet Resources – this is an example of an online illustration that calls out the specific material types, and lists applicable repair procedures -Other Repair Information Sources – other service information sources may also be used to access repair procedures. These include sources such as: -ALLDATA provides OEM repair information that addresses diagnostics, repair, and estimating information -Mitchell provides OEM collision repair information. -* ALLDATA and Mitchell are subscription- and/or fee-based information sources -Estimating Databases and Guides – estimating databases or guides may be used for material identification. Materials may be identified in the parts listing. In this example, Mitchell Collision Estimating identifies the vehicle’s front pillar as high-strength steel. Estimating guides should be used along with service information to verify part identification -Other Information Resources – other sources that may be used for material identification include organizations involved with the development of a material. These sources provide general -American Iron and Steel Institute – the American Iron and Steel Institute website www.steel.org contains technical information regarding the use of higher-strength steels for automotive applications -Aluminum Association – the Aluminum Association website www.aluminum.org has listings of vehicles that have used and may currently be using aluminum for exterior body panels and structures -Automotive Composites Alliance – the Automotive Composites Alliance website www.autocomposites.org has information regarding the use and characteristics of carbon fiber parts for automotive application -International Magnesium Association – the International Magnesium Association website www.intlmag.org provides information regarding the use of magnesium for automotive applications -Physical identification Methods – a magnet can be used for an easy and quick identification method for metal parts. Magnets are not attracted to a non-ferrous part, such as aluminum. They are attracted to a ferrous part, such as steel. If hardness testing equipment is available, hardness testing may be another method that can be used for material identification. Hardness testing equipment may: -Be used for identification of various types and strengths of steel -Require a small piece be removed from the part -Using Part Construction for Identification – knowing the type of part construction may help with material identification. For example, castings found in vehicle structures are typically either aluminum or magnesium. Other parts, such as some drivetrain and suspension parts, may be made from cast iron. Some examples of aluminum or magnesium parts that may be a casting include radiator core supports, strut towers, and pillars. Stamped parts are made using aluminum or steel. Stampings are used for exterior body and structural parts. Extrusions are made using aluminum. Extrusions may be made using the hydroforming process. Extrusions are generally used for structural applications, such as lower rails and rocker panel reinforcements Casting – top left Extrusion – bottom left Stamping – right -Using Attachments for Aluminum Identification – service information may provide the specific attachments used for the original construction of newer vehicles. Knowing the specific attachment may help with identification of the material. For example, specific attachments used for aluminum parts include: -Bolts that use isolators, such as corrosion-resistant coatings or nylon washers. Isolating strips that are made from rubberized sealant or have a bi-metallic design are used between aluminum exterior body panels and a steel inner structure. It is important to not confuse corrosion-resistant coatings on bolts with thread locking compound -Rivets such as self-piercing rivets (SPRs) -Clinches to connect outer skins to inner panels and reinforcements -* Because some types of attachments may be used for steel as well as aluminum parts, using attachments as a means of identification should be used along with other methods. If the panels are spot welded, the panels are likely to be steel Spot Welds and Rivets – top left Self Piercing Rivets and Bolts – top right Self Piercing Rivets – bottom left Clinches – bottom right Vehicle Construction Material Types (2/2) Material Types Types of Steel -Types and Strengths of Steel – damage analysis considerations and strengths of steels include -Vehicle makers may have different names for the same type of steel. For example, high-tension steel, extra-high-strength steel, etc. are all names for steels that may be similar in strength. Therefore, it is important to pay attention to actual tensile strength and/or yield strength, typically listed in megapascals (MPa) rather than a vehicle maker’s steel trade name -One megapascal is one million pascals and is equal to about 145 psi. Therefore, a part that is rated at 800 MPa is equal to about 116,000 psi Top to Bottom Hydroformed Aluminum &gt;800 MPa – Ultra-High-Strength Steel &gt;400MPa&lt;800MPa – Extra-High-Strength Steel &gt;180MPa&lt;400MPa – High-Strength Steel &lt;180MPa – Mild Steel -Steel Strengths and Common Part Locations Chart – this chart shows strengths and locations of some steel parts. The diagonal arrow in the middle of the chart is for reference only to show the direction and flow for reading the chart. A UHSS part is typically more brittle than an HSS part, which in turn, is typically more brittle than a mild steel part. * too much information to include. Chart does not show any words so I would have to recreate chart -Steel Part Forming and Strength – the forming, or manufacturing process, of steel parts may contribute to the strength of the part. Some part forming and manufacturing processes include hot-stamping, tailor-rolled blanks, and tailor-welded blanks Tailor-Welded Blank and a Laser Weld -Hot-Stamping – the hot-stamping process starts with a boron-alloyed steel part, which is heated and then pressed into shape using a cooled die (die-quenching). The die cools the stamped pillar at different rates along the length of the part, making some parts of the inner pillar stronger than other parts of the same pillar. This process is used instead of tailor-welding or tailor-rolling. When making repair decisions, consider that these parts contribute to the crash safety rating. An incorrect repair will reduce the safety performance of the structure -Tailor-Rolled Blanks – another design being used in vehicle structures is tailor-rolled blanks. Tailor-rolled blanks: -Are often made from higher-strength steel, and/or hot-stamping, and may have limited repairability -Have different thicknesses of the same strength steel within the same part -Have no seam at the transition. Because seams are not produced, identifying tailor-rolled parts may be difficult. During the manufacturing process, the roller increases pressure in areas of the sheet steel where thinner metal is desired, and decreases pressure for areas where thicker metal is desired From top to bottom 1.0 mm 1.05-1.85 mm 1.9 mm 1.85-1.65 mm 1.6 mm 1.65-1.75 (Transition Zone) 1.8 mm 1.0 mm Mild steel -Tailor-Welded Blanks – some parts are made using tailor-welded blank technology. A tailor-welded blank is a panel that has dissimilar thicknesses or metal alloys. The purpose of using a tailor-welded blank is to provide strength and/or stiffness in areas of a one-piece structure without using reinforcements, thus reducing the weight of the part. The tailor-welded blank is designed for collision energy management. The varying thicknesses and strengths of the part can be designed to collapse in a predictable manner. One example is a tailor-welded front rail that has a collapse zone at the front of the rail assembly. These assemblies may not have conventional crush initiators, convolutions, or holes that are commonly used to identify crush zones. Tailor-welded blanks are laser-welded together to form one continuous piece. The laser welds cannot be duplicated during the repair process. During damage analysis, consider that the laser weld is typically not a sectioning location. Never section a tailor-welded blank at the laser weld unless called for in a vehicle maker procedure -Steel Usage – the percent of higher strength steel used in vehicles increases with each new model year. Today, coated boron-alloyed steel is found in pillar, roof, and floor reinforcements. Gray – Ultra-High Strength Die-Quenched Green – Ultra-High-Strength Yellow – High-Strength Orange – Regular Grade -High-Strength Steel – applications for high-strength steel include -Unitized structure parts -Some exterior body panels -* More exterior body panels may be constructed from higher strength steel in the future to provide another area where weight reduction can apply. Weight reduction can be achieved by reducing the thickness of the panel. Repairs may be limited on exterior panels made from high strength steel because these parts are harder, thinner, more sensitive to heat, and more prone to cracking during straightening -Ultra-High-Strength Steel – UHSS may have a tensile strength of 780 MPa and above. These steel grades are suitable for forming structural and safety-related automotive components. UHSS can be formed into complex shapes such as door impact beams, bumper reinforcements, seating, and structural body parts -Boron-Alloyed Steel – some boron-alloyed steel receives a special coating during the manufacturing process. Boron-alloyed steel: -May not be galvanized, since the coating burns off during the hot-stamping process. The use of heat during galvanizing also changes the structure of the steel. -May be coated during manufacturing with an aluminum/silicone coating applied at a low temperature to the sheet blank. This provides corrosion-protection properties similar to zinc coating. Like a zinc coating, the aluminum/silicon coating is a sacrificial coating that is more active than steel, so it corrodes to protect the steel -* There is a type of boron-alloyed steel called Usibor used in the pillars of various vehicles. Usibor is an ultra-high-strength, hot-worked steel. Other applications for Usibor steel include front and rear bumper reinforcements, door intrusion beams, A- and B-pillar reinforcements, and roof and floor reinforcements -Aluminum Usage – the aluminum content in some vehicles is increasing with each new model year. Examples of aluminum parts on current vehicles include the outer panels, structures, frames and wheels. -Aluminum Considerations – the presence of aluminum parts requires the appropriate tools, procedures, materials, and/or training for repairs. Although vehicle maker recommendations vary, aluminum castings are not repaired. Aluminum extrusions have very limited, or no repair options. The most repairable types of aluminum parts are stampings. Identifying aluminum parts is an important step to determine the correct repair plan. A magnet can be used for easy and quick identification. Depending on the extent of damage, equipment and techniques are available to allow for the repair of aluminum exterior body panels -Aluminum Alloys – pure aluminum is very soft and ductile. Aluminum alloys are pure aluminum mixed with other elements. The adding of other elements can affect the strength, formability, weldability, and corrosion resistance. Heat treating refers to heating and cooling operations performed to change the properties or structure of a metal. Aluminum alloys are classified as heat-treatable or non-heat treatable. Series 2000, 6000, and 7000 are heat-treatable, while series 1000, 3000, 4000, and 5000 are not heat-treatable. The most common allows used for automotive applications are 5000 and 6000 series Picture: Red – Heat treated – -2000 series -6000 series -7000 series Blue – Non-Heat treated – -1000 series -3000 series -4000 series -5000 series Magnesium -Magnesium Characteristics – parts made from magnesium are increasingly being used with newer vehicle construction. Magnesium is a lightweight material that is both lighter and stronger than some steel. Magnesium has good noise and vibration dampening characteristics. In addition, magnesium is a non-magnetic metal. Parts made from magnesium are typically made from castings -Magnesium Applications – as a construction material, magnesium has a wide variety of automotive applications -Vehicle Construction Examples – some applications where magnesium parts are used in newer vehicle construction include -Radiator core supports -Front engine and suspension crossmembers -Roof frame and mounting brackets -Inner liftgates -Interior Applications – additional applications where magnesium parts are used in vehicle construction include: -Instrument panel frames -Steering wheels -Seat frames -Inner door panels -Magnesium Precautions – when working with or around magnesium, it is important to be aware that: -Magnesium parts and dust can ignite -While you should exercise caution, the likelihood of a fire is minimal. With magnesium parts, the heat dissipates quickly. For a part to ignite, the entire part must exceed 883 degrees F -In the event of a fire, a person trained on using a class D fire extinguisher can extinguish the fire. If this type of extinguisher is not available, the fire can be smothered with dirt or sand. Applying water may spread the fire -* For optimum safety, always consider the heat exposure when cutting, welding, or grinding on or near magnesium parts. Although magnesium can be welded, no procedures currently exist for automotive applications Carbon Fiber -What is Carbon Fiber – carbon fiber-reinforced composite, more commonly called carbon fiber, is being used more on newer vehicles. -Carbon fiber parts are a combination of a polymer and carbon fibers. The carbon fibers are the reinforcing substance. Carbon fibers are made from carbon atoms, which are joined together to form long fiber strands. These fibers are very strong and lightweight. -Carbon fiber parts are reinforced through the use of woven carbon fiber matting, or chopped carbon fibers. A part made from chopped carbon fiber is heavier than a part made from woven carbon fiber matting. Carbon fiber matting is manufactured in various weave patterns -*Note: There are aftermarket treatments that will give a part the cosmetic appearance of being carbon fiber when they are not actually carbon fiber parts. For example, vinyl decals, paint, and hydro-dipping Vehicle Protection During the Repair Process (1/2) Initial Inspection -Protecting the Vehicle – from the initial vehicle inspection to the final delivery and all steps in between, it is important to avoid causing additional damage to vehicles we work on and to surrounding vehicles. Careful inspection of the vehicle and our surroundings is critical. Think through each inspection, disassembly, and repair operation, considering what can go wrong and what safeguards will help to avoid further vehicle damage -Vehicle Check-In – during the vehicle check-in, the initial safety inspection is performed and the vehicle is prepared for the repair process -Inventory and Store Personal Belongings – it is important to protect the vehicle owner’s personal belongings. When the vehicle is drivable, it is a good practice to instruct the owner to remove any personal belongings prior to dropping the vehicle off for repairs. For tow-in or non-drivable vehicles, check the vehicle for any personal belongings that will need to be inventoried and stored for protection -Crash Wrap Exposed Areas – crash wrap any exposed areas. It is important to seal any normally protected areas, such as those exposed due to collision-related damages. Exposed areas may include electrical components, window openings, door gaps, and hood/trunk openings -Protect the Interior – protect the interior of the vehicle against production-shop-related damages by installing floor mats, seat covers, steering wheel covers, and keeping the windows rolled up during the repair process -Check for Alternative Fuel Systems – determining the presence of an alternative fuel system during the initial check-in is a good best practice to help reduce safety concerns for the vehicle, as well as shop staff. Some examples of alternative fuel systems are hybrid, electric, propane, and compressed natural gas. Note the presence of any alternative fuel systems using the shop standard operating procedure SOP) for vehicle markings -Emergency Response Guides – emergency response guides (ERGs) are: -Free online publications that explain how to approach an electric vehicle or hybrid electric vehicle -Written by the vehicle makers for emergency responders to safely extricate someone from an electric vehicle, put out a fire, and handle other emergency situations -Effective for the collision industry in that they include identification information and part locations and descriptions, among other information. Hybrid vehicle disabling procedures are included, but the information may not include instructions for pulling the service disconnect, which is recommended before a vehicle is towed or doing collision repairs -Panel Gaps – note any areas with gaps that have closed up and could contact adjacent panels. Highlight these areas with appropriate vehicle markings to alert all shop employees. These areas often include the door contacting -Towing and Moving the Vehicle – closely inspect the vehicle prior to moving the vehicle within the shop and/or parking lot. Check the brakes before starting the vehicle. Identify any broken/damaged suspension and/or driveline components. Check for possible electrical issues that could cause a safety concern when restoring power to the vehicle or placing the key in the RUN position. Use a car dolly, or similar equipment, when suspension damage prevents the vehicle from rolling away -Moving the Vehicle Safely – do not push electric or hybrid vehicles with the wheels on the ground. Moving the vehicle with the drive wheels on the ground may generate electrical energy and charge the condenser in the inverter. There is also a risk of starting a fire if damage to high-voltage cables create a short to the vehicle’s chassis Vehicle Protection During the Repair Process (2/2) Production Shop Safely -Teardown – precautions before doing a teardown on collision damaged vehicles include: -Disable restraint systems to prevent accidental deployment -Use caution when applying penetrating oil near the vehicle finish. Some penetrating oils contain solvents that may damage the finish -Protect the vehicle finish against sharp objects. Clean up broken glass inside the vehicle to prevent additional damage during the teardown process -Protect any exposed system components, including airbag sensors, ABS sensor, MAP sensors, electrical connectors, and damaged or cut wires -Identify vehicle maker repair procedures and requirements -Identify proper lifting points -Fluids, Hoses, and Lines – -prepare to capture any leaking fluids or drained fluids as part of the teardown process. Captured fluids may include: -Antifreeze -Transmission fluid -Power steering fluid -Fuel -Brake fluid -Brake fluid may damage the finish and can be conductive if it absorbs enough moisture, and can cause fire if it gets into electrical connectors. Identify and cap any open connection points for the: -Air conditioning system -Power steering system -Fuel system -Brake system -Cooling system -Electrical connections -Note: Use caution when working with brake and fuel system parts. Refer to vehicle maker recommendations for depressurizing systems before starting any work. Verify self-test systems are disabled on brake systems -One-Time Use Fasteners – technicians must identify one-time use fasteners and torque specifications as noted in the vehicle maker repair procedures. One-time use fasteners may also be referred to as single-use fasteners -Electrolyte Spills – electrolyte spills are highly corrosive to: -Body panels -Frame rails -Pinch welds -Exterior finish -Electrical components -Mechanical components -Belts -Hoses -Note: Most high-voltage batteries have a gel-type electrolyte, which does not spill. However, it is possible that battery damage can result in some electrolyte leakage. Electrolyte from a high-voltage battery is highly alkaline or caustic. Lead-acid batteries have electrolyte that is highly acidic -Safety Equipment – safety equipment required for cleaning up battery electrolyte spills include: -Chemical resistant gloves (acid or alkaline) -Litmus paper for checking the acidic or alkaline content of the suspected spill -Neoprene rubber boots or shoe covers, as well as coveralls, suits, or aprons -Alkali- and acid-resistant face shields or goggles. Wear eye protection to protect against accidental splashing of the electrolyte -Neutralizing Spills – electrolyte spills require neutralizing with a solution. The solution used depends on whether it is an alkaline or acidic spill. For an alkaline spill, such as from a hybrid vehicle battery, neutralize with boric acid and water solution. Neutralize any spilled acid. For an acidic spill, such as from a 12-volt battery, neutralize with baking soda or ammonia -Alternative Fuel Vehicles – alternative fuel vehicles must be handled carefully to avoid possible hazards -Electric and Hybrid Electric Vehicles – use caution and follow vehicle-maker recommendations regarding service on high-voltage batteries. Some vehicle makers suggest only factory-trained technicians may perform high-voltage battery removal and installation. Some vehicle makers may offer extended warranty parameters, such as 10 years and 100,000 miles. Damaging a battery during removal may void this warranty -Compressed Natural Gas Vehicles – most compressed natural gas (CNG) fueled vehicles are conversions. CNG vehicles made by a vehicle maker are generally identifiable by the nameplate. CNG conversions are identified by: -A label inside the fuel-filler door, and there may be a decal -A fuel-filler valve instead of, or in addition to, a gasoline filler neck -Stainless steel fuel lines, which may have a sheathing cover -Note – CNG is very dense when compressed but lighter than air when released so there is more risk of fire at the ceiling level than at the floor level -Liquid Propane Gas Vehicles – most liquid propane gas (LPG) vehicles are conversion with no official emblem or nameplate for identification. These vehicles are identifiable by the: -Fuel-filler valve, instead of or in addition to, a gasoline filler neck -Torpedo- or doughnut-shaped fuel tanks either in the cargo area, underside, or on the truck bed -Copper fuel lines, which may be covered by a sheathing -Check label inside the fuel door -Liquid Propane Gas Considerations – propane is a liquid state under pressure, but immediately releases as a vapor when a pressure-relief valve opens. A mild temperature difference, such as moving the tank from a cold to a hot area, is enough to open the pressure-relief valve. Propane tanks are painted white or a light reflective color-dark-colored tanks can absorb enough heat from the sun to open the pressure-relief valve. Propane vapor is heavier than air, so the vapors will hover near the floor if released. Propane is highly flammable. Mixtures in the air as low as 2% will easily ignite and explode. Released vapors can form a flammable layer against the floor -Electronic Key – electronic keys are popular on many vehicles, not just HEVs and EVs. Depending on the work being performed, it is important to make sure the vehicle is powered off before attempting repairs. To ensure the vehicle does not power up or start unexpectedly, creating an unsafe condition or damage to the vehicle or its surroundings, store keys the required minimum distance from the vehicle. Features such as remote start and phone apps, where the vehicle owner can start the vehicle or operate parts of the vehicle, also needs to be considered and deactivated. Disconnecting the 12-volt battery typically works, keeping in mind some vehicles may have auxiliary batteries that may keep some systems powered. -Part Storage – store undamaged parts safely. Organize removed parts to avoid loss or damage. Use parts carts and part bins whenever possible. Do not store removed parts inside the vehicle. Bag interior parts to protect them from damage and repair debris. Store glass safely in a glass rack. When working with or handling trim panels, headliners, seats, carpet, or other items that may stain easily, be sure your hands, gloves, and clothes are clean to avoid leaving stains -Heat Considerations – heat should only be used following vehicle maker guidelines. If heat is applied to parts and the vehicle maker does not have allowances for heat or the recommended limits are exceeded, the affected parts must be replaced. When heating a part: -Slowly heat the area around the damage (50-75mm from the center) to prevent a sudden variation in the metal temperature. -Keep tension applied to the steel, and allow the steel to cool naturally. Do not quench with water -Use temperature indicators to monitor the amount of heat applied to a part -When using non-contact thermometers, take into consideration that shiny surfaces, like bare metal, may have a low emissivity and not provide an accurate reading -Safety when Using Heat – when using heat, the working area must be clear of flammable and combustible items. Fire prevention equipment and first aid supplies, which includes treatment for burns, should be readily available. Fire prevention equipment may include a fire extinguisher, bucket of water, and a fire blanket -Protecting the Finish – protect the vehicle finish against sharp objects, such as clamps, chains, and other pulling hardware. This can be done with fender covers or a welding blanket. Verify there is no broken glass inside the vehicle that could cause additional damage during repairs -Anchoring – anchor the vehicle properly to avoid additional damage to the vehicle. Clean the anchoring points before clamping. Make sure that wires, brake and fuel lines, and hoses will not be damaged when attaching clamps. Do not anchor to mechanical or suspension parts. Check and re-apply coatings to anchoring and clamp attachment areas to avoid possible corrosion -Working with Vehicle Fluids – vehicle fluid warnings and safety precautions should be considered when working with air conditioning oils, brake fluids, and power steering fluid -Air Conditioning Oils – use caution when handling air conditioning oils, as they can cause damage to the vehicle finish, plastic parts, engine drive belts, and coolant hoses. Only use oil from a sealed container. Some oils will absorb moisture if left open and can cause damage when introduced into an A/C system -Brake Fluids – brake fluid spills may damage the finish and can be conductive if it absorbs enough moisture. Spills can cause problems with electronic systems and may lead to a fire if the fluid comes into contact with electrical connectors -Power Steering Fluids – do not mix power steering fluid types. This may result in seal deterioration or leaks -General Safety Guidelines – follow these general guidelines for vehicle safety: -Ensure vehicle fluids, such as coolant and oil, are filled before starting the vehicle. Before adding new coolant, review the vehicle maker’s specifications for the correct coolant type and for the ratio of coolant necessary to provide adequate freeze protection -Do not attempt to start or leave the vehicle running without the battery connected. -Do not use a jumper box in place of the battery or disconnect the battery while the vehicle is running -Do not connect, or disconnect, modules or sensors while the battery is connected, ignition is ON, or the vehicle is running, unless instructed to do so by the vehicle maker -General Safety Guidelines (cont’d) – follow these additional general guidelines for vehicle safety: -Always use caution when working on fuel or brake system parts. Refer to the vehicle maker’s recommendations for disabling self-test systems and depressurizing systems before starting any work -Verify the brake system is working properly after completing repairs and prior to attempting to drive the vehicle -General Safety Tasks – observe the following guidelines for safe repair of mechanical components: -Do not use an impact wrench to install a wheel bearing – torque all fasteners to correct specifications -Do not use shock absorbers that have longer travel than specified by the vehicle maker. If a suspension is allowed to travel more than designed by the vehicle maker, part damage may occur -To avoid damage to the vehicle, use caution to identify proper lifting points before raising the vehicle off the ground -Do not allow the suspension or axle to hang unsupported, as this may tear or cause other damage to the brake lines -Fasteners that are heated should be replaced -Sanding – protect all interior surfaces to minimize sanding dust and debris from getting into the vehicle. Do not apply body filler to the windshield or rear glass pinchweld areas. Protect exterior trim and moldings on adjacent panels when sanding -Corrosion Protection – apply corrosion protection materials to all repaired areas. Use appropriate corrosion protection when joining dissimilar materials to prevent galvanic corrosion. Remove any shavings or grinding particles with a magnet or vacuum. If unattended, these materials may rattle, make noise, and lead to corrosion issues. Use caution when working with carbon fiber, as exposed carbon fiber can cause galvanic corrosion if it comes in contact with metal. Carbon fiber dust is conductive and can also cause electrical shorts -Repair Product Considerations – use caution when working with: -Adhesives -Fillers -Foams -Seam sealers -Corrosion protection materials -Other products -Note: Maintain clean gloves to minimize the chances of touching tools, panels, or the interior and transferring adhesive. Remove or protect the vehicle interior and adjacent areas from materials that may drip or cause overspray. Wear multiple layers of nitrile gloves before starting the procedure. This will allow for easy replacement of contaminated gloves -Checking the Repair Zone – when welding, heating, cutting, grinding, drilling, pulling, or stress-relieving, identify what is behind any outer panels under repair to avoid damage or starting a fire. Check for: -Foam -Seam sealer -Corrosion protection -Undercoating -Wire harnesses -Sound deadening materials -Interior trim/carpet -Adhesive-bonded panels -Brake lines -Fuel tanks and lines -Note: When cutting, grinding, drilling, or welding, pay attention to where the sparks, chips, and debris are going. Sparks can embed in glass, and steel particles can cause rust rings on surfaces. Spark paper and welding blankets can help protect against this. Curtains between work stalls can help protect adjacent vehicles. Examples of items to check for also include bedliners, trim panels, control modules, adjacent panels, glass, and surrounding vehicles. When applying corrosion protection or other flammable products, ensure adequate time is allowed for the flammable gases to dissipate before welding, using a heat gun, or using other ignition sources in the vicinity. -General Welding Considerations – prior to welding on a vehicle: -Surrounding the welding location with welding blankets -Disconnect and isolate both battery cables -Disable the passive restraint system -Identify all material types in the repair zone -Identify interior trim panels that may need to be removed to provide access to the panel backside and avoid damage from weld-on dent removal tools or other repair processes -Remove electronic equipment within 12” of the repair area – this includes control modules and sensors -Keep the current path short by placing work clamps close to the weld site -Route cables away from wiring harnesses and sensitive electronic parts that may be damaged due to the welder’s magnetic fields -Alternative Fuel Vehicles – when welding on an electric or hybrid electric vehicle, refer to vehicle maker requirements. Some vehicle makers require technicians to disable the high-voltage system is welding within 12” of the high-voltage battery. Disabling the battery may involve removing the service disconnect. Vehicle makers may require removal of the high-voltage battery to avoid heat damage related to cutting or welding. Always use caution when welding on alternative fuel vehicles. Remember that LPG and CNG are both flammable and explosive. Note: Before welding, cover the high-voltage battery with a welding blanket to protect it from sparks -Heating Aluminum – use caution when applying heat to aluminum parts, as they do not change color before reaching their melting point -Heating High- and Ultra-High-Strength Steel – heating considerations for high-strength steel (HSS) and ultra-high-strength steel (UHSS) include: -Do not straighten UHSS parts unless instructed to do so in the OEM documentation -Straighten HSS parts cold unless OEM documentation recommends heating -Observe the vehicle maker’s limits for both the maximum temperature and the length of heating time when heating parts -Note: Using heat on parts that are to be replaced during initial straightening may help to reduce collateral damage to return adjacent parts. This allows the entire structure to return to proper dimensions without having to apply excessive force to remove damage to HSS and UHSS replacement parts -Refinishing – vehicle safety precautions apply when performing refinishing tasks, including prepping, painting, wet sanding, and buffing the vehicle -Prep – mask and/or cover all areas outside the repair zone to minimize overspray issues. Protect exterior trim and adjacent panels when sanding. Ensure trim on any adjacent panels, that were not blended/painted, are properly covered/masked to prevent damage -Heating/Baking – identify hybrid or propane-fueled vehicles that may require special attention. Use caution when heating/baking vehicles with high-voltage batteries and refer to vehicle maker recommendations for temperature and maximum allowable time for bake cycle exposure -Wet Sand/Buff – cover trim and glass on panels being wet-sanded and buffed to protect from damage during the sanding process or contact from buffer and/or buffing materials Windows and Advanced Driver Assist Systems (ADAS) (1/2) Introduction -Advanced Driver Assistance Systems – advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) are a collection of safety systems that warn the driver of a potential collision or lane deviation. Some systems actively control the vehicle to prevent a collision, such as providing braking or steering assistance. Other types of ADAS automatically control common functions and assist the driver in emergency situations. Some ADAS cameras and sensors attach to, or are located near, the windshield -Purpose of this course – this course covers ADAS parts that relate to the windshield, and systems that have sensors or cameras attached to the windshield. These typically require removal whenever the windshield is removed. Some parts require special calibration procedures to be done after installation. A few examples are – Lane Departure warning, Collision mitigation cameras, rain sensors. -There are many types of ADAS, but this course does not cover systems that use cameras or sensors located in other areas of the vehicle. For example, this course does not cover – blind spot detection, parking assist, rearview cameras. Parts for these systems are typically located on the bumpers, door mirrors, or the rear body. -Windshield and ADAS Part Damage – windshields and ADAS parts can be damaged on the road by projectiles, such as rocks or other types of road debris. They can also be damaged as a result of a collision. Windshield replacement or repairs are commonly done by glass repair or replacement service providers. The vehicle owner may directly contact a glass service provider if only the windshield work to these glass service providers. This work may be for repairable windshield damage, windshield replacement, or R&amp;I during collision repairs. -Windshield and ADAS Part (continued) – ADAS parts associated with the windshield can also be damaged. A pre-scan using diagnostics software may identify damaged or non-functioning ADAS parts. Diagnostic software can also be called a scan tool. This may require special diagnostic software and may have to be done by a dealership. Direct damage to the windshield in areas of ADAS parts is an indication that those parts may require replacement. Inspection of ADAS parts may require removal of the parts to get a good look at them. Inspect these parts for cracks to the module, lens, or sensor. Also look for debris in the lens. The vehicle maker may require a camera to be replaced if debris is found in the lens - Lane Departure Warning/Lane Keep assist – the lane departure warning (LDW) and lane keep assist (LKA) systems use the same type of camera. This is often a multi-purpose object detection camera, which may work with the other types of ADAS. Most lane keep assist cameras are located behind the windshield while some are located on the grille. For LDW or LKA, the camera monitors lane markings on the road. An LDW system only gives warnings if the vehicle is drifting out of the lane. Warnings may be audio, visual, or a vibration of the seat or steering wheel. An LKA system may provide an audible and/or visual alert. A light steering assistance feature may help to keep the vehicle in the lane which typically, can be turned off. - Collision Mitigation System – collision mitigation systems (CMS) may use the object detection camera located behind the windshield, a radar unit located behind the grille, or both. Depending on the system, these are used to detect vehicles, objects, or pedestrians on the road ahead. A CMS may provide a warning if approaching a vehicle or object too closely. It may also provide automatic braking or braking assist if a collision is imminent. This is done to avoid collisions and reduce the effect of a low-speed impact. - Pre-Collision Systems – a pre-collision system may work in conjunction with a CMS. Both initiate the restraint systems if they detect an imminent collision. For example, a pre-collision system may adjust the seats, activate the seat belt tensioners, raise the head restraints, and close the windows to protect the occupants. - Automatic High-Beam Assist – automatic high beam assist is a feature that automatically controls the high beams. It turns off the high beams when it detects oncoming traffic, or when it detects a slower moving vehicle ahead. The system turns the high beams back on when the vehicle has passed. High beams are also turned on or off depending on the vehicle speed. These types of systems use either a separate camera sensor attached to the interior rearview mirror, or work with a multi-purpose object detection camera. - Night Vision Systems – night vision systems use a special camera located behind the windshield or in the grille. They provide an enhanced video display of objects in the dark. These types of systems use one of two types of night vision technologies. Far-infrared technology uses thermal imaging to detect living objects, such as pedestrians and animals. Near-infrared systems use high-powered infrared lighting, which is invisible to the human eye. This type of light is similar to household remote controls. - Head-Up Display – the head-up display (HUD) projects images onto the windshield or a transparent display. The projected image often appears holographic with the use of a special type of windshield. HUD increases the driver’s ability to pay attention to the road ahead. Information projected may include: -The speedometer -The tachometer -Navigation -Safety alerts - Automatic Windshield Wipers – an automatic windshield wiper system uses a rain sensor. The rain sensor may also be called a moisture sensor. These are commonly attached directly to the windshield. The sensor detects the amount of moisture on the windshield by sending an infrared ray through the windshield. The wet windshield deflects the infrared ray, sending a signal to the wiper motor module to start the wipers. The wiper switch may have to be turned on or adjusted to the automatic setting to work -Windshields and ADAS Concerns – before removing, replacing, or repairing the windshield, verify whether or not the vehicle is equipped with ADAS. If it is, determine part removal and installation requirements. Refer to the vehicle specific instructions for windshield removal to determine what parts require removal. Order the glass specific to equipped ADAS parts. Do not repair glass in front of cameras or sensors. Some vehicle markers state that the windshield will require replacement if damage is in front of the camera or sensor. Other vehicle markers may provide a diagram of the windshield. The diagram may extend beyond the camera or sensor locations where repairs are not allowed. Subaru provides a diagram for vehicles equipped with Eyesight cameras where glass repairs are prohibited. -ADAS Calibrations – ADAS are becoming much more common with new models. They are no longer limited to luxury vehicles. Some systems may become standard on all vehicle markers. Most cameras require some sort of calibration, if not multiple calibrations, for each system on the vehicle. Calibrations may include driving the vehicle, an intensive camera aiming procedure, or both. These types of calibrations usually require the use of a scan tool. Special tools, such are target kits, may be required for calibration aiming procedures. An ADAS may be considered a safety system. If parts are not properly installed and calibrated, this may result in a liability issue. Windows and Advanced Driver Assist Systems (ADAS) (2/2) -Identification – when inspecting a damaged windshield, look for cameras and sensors. Safety systems associated with the windshield can be found a few different ways. Perform a visual inspection for sensors, cameras, buttons, and switches. Look for MILs, or malfunction indicator lamps, on the dash and page through menus located either on the dash, or the infotainment menu. The OEM Calibration Requirements Search tool on the I-CAR RTS website helps identify which options are available on different models. RTS also provides a helpful article on damage analysis for ADAS identification. Finally, you can identify equipped ADAS using a scan tool, either an OEM-specific tool, software, or an aftermarket tool. -Vehicle-Specific Service Information – look up the windshield removal instructions in the vehicle-specific service information. These instructions will typically identify ADAS parts that require removal when removing the windshield. Refer to any provided links for removing procedures to ensure proper removal. Vehicle-specific service information will also identify when calibration is required and provide instructions. Links to OEM service information websites are available in the I-CAR Repairability Technical Support, or RTS Portal. This website also provides instructions on accessing and navigating each OEM website. -OEM Glass Replacement – the vehicle maker may specify OEM replacement glass. This ensures the replacement glass has the same light refraction properties or ADAS mounting brackets as the original glass. -Glass Replacement Considerations – the black border, or frit, must match the locations of cameras and sensors. The wrong frit design may block the view and cause issues. Do not dispose of the damaged glass until you verify the replacement part includes all the necessary brackets. A bracket may have to be transferred to the new glass. Order the replacement windshield according to the ADAS options on the vehicle. A windshield may have different part numbers. -HUD Glass Replacement Considerations – on vehicles equipped with a HUD, cover the projector during the repair. If the windshield requires replacement, be sure to order the glass specific to the HUD. The HUD on some vehicles must be calibrated whenever the windshield is removed and installed. Some HUDs do not project onto the windshield. In these cases, a transparent display pops up from the dash panel. It is still important to avoid damage by ensuring they are covered during the windshield removal. -HUD Glass – the image on the right represents a windshield that is specially designed for the reflection of a HUD. Notice that the image is clear and may even appear holographic. -Non-HUD Glass – the image on the right represents a windshield that is not designed for reflecting a HUD. If the correct windshield is not ordered, the image will not display properly. The image may reflect off both the inside and outside surfaces of the glass, which appears as a double image. The image may also appear crooked and blurry. -Cameras – besides the object detection camera which can be a single or a double system, there are also night vision cameras. Cameras may be attached to a bracket on the windshield, rearview mirror assembly, or the upper console. The vehicle-specific windshield removal procedure will identify all the parts that require removal, including any cameras or sensors. At least one vehicle maker, Nissan/Infiniti, does not require the camera to be removed if the windshield will be removed and reinstalled. -Camera Removal – follow the instructions in the vehicle-specific service information to prevent damage to the camera or electrical system during removal. Disconnect and isolate the negative battery cable on certain vehicles. Other vehicles may only need to be turned off for a few seconds before removal. The camera units are commonly located behind trim panels around the rearview mirror. Remove these to access the camera unit and electrical connector. Disconnect the electrical connectors before removing the camera unit. This can only be done after removing the camera on certain vehicles. -Camera Removal Concerns – the camera removal procedure will help identify the location of the release tabs and a sequence of pulling directions for removing the camera unit. Cameras that are attached to the upper console sometimes require removing mechanical fasteners. Avoid touching the camera lens or allowing the lens to get dirty during removal. Cover the lens during repairs. Vehicle makers require the camera to be replaced if the lens get dirty because it is too small to clean properly. -Rain Sensors – rain sensors typically attach to a bracket on the windshield near the rearview mirror. Some rain sensor units include an ambient light sensor. The ambient light sensor detects the level of ambient light and turns the headlamps on or off accordingly. Some rain sensor units include a solar sensor to detect the location of sunlight and automatically control the air conditioning system to the driver or passenger side. Rain sensors typically have a gel pad or layer that contacts the surface of the glass. This gel pad may also be called silicone or film. -Rain Sensor Removal – the removal procedure may require the battery to be disconnected before removing the rain sensor. Remove trim covers and the rearview mirror or other parts as specified in the procedure. Disconnect the electrical connector before removing the sensor unit. Always use care when removing the sensor to prevent damaging the gel pad. Some vehicle makers require the entire sensor be replaced if the gel pad is damaged during removal. At least on vehicle maker specifies to unlock the rain sensor and wait 30 minutes for the gel pad to release from the windshield. -Rain Sensor Precautions – do not touch the surface of the gel pad and keep it clean during storage. The vehicle maker may recommend leaving the rain sensor attached to the original glass until it can be installed on the replacement windshield. It may be beneficial to first verify it can be removed without damage. This will help prevent delays if a new gel pad must be ordered. Reattach it to the original windshield to help keep it clean. Some rain sensors cannot be reused if they are removed. -Cameras/Sensors for Auto High-Beam – high beam assist systems may use a separate photo sensor built into the rearview mirror assembly. Follow the procedure for removing the rearview mirror equipped with a high beam assist sensor. Other systems use the multi-purpose object detection camera to automatically control the high beams. Calibration for automatic high beam systems is typically not required. However, there is a calibration procedure for the high beam assist system on some makes and models. -Night Vision Cameras – some Lexus and Mercedes-Benz vehicles have a night vision camera mounted to the rearview mirror assembly. A Lexus equipped with night view assist will have the night vision camera lens separate from the two-object detection cameras but are included in the same assembly. Both the object detection cameras and the night vision system require separate calibration procedures when reinstalled. A night vision camera on an equipped Mercedes is a separate part. Calibration of the night vision camera is required when reinstalled. BMW and Audi also have night vision systems, but the night vision cameras on those vehicles are not mounted on the windshield. -ADAS Installation Instructions – before installing a replacement windshield, verify that it has the brackets and frit design for the ADAS parts. ADAS parts are typically installed or reinstalled in the reverse order of removal. Install the part, connect the electrical connector, and replace the trim covers. It may be required to connect the electrical connector before reattaching the negative battery terminal or turning on the vehicle. Verify the windshield is clean in the camera or sensor locations before installation. This may be specified in the procedure but is a general good practice. Clean these areas of the windshield with a lint-free cloth, isopropyl alcohol, or a specified product. Glass cleaners can contaminate camera lenses preventing them from functioning properly. -Rain Sensor Installation – before installing the rain sensor onto the windshield, remove any gel pad remnants from the glass surface. Thoroughly clean the windshield in the sensor area. Gel pad remnants on the original glass indicate that the pad is damaged. Some vehicle makers specify that the gel pad be replaced only if damaged. Others require replacement anytime the sensor is removed. Some gel pads are not supplied and require the entire rain sensor replacement if the gal pad is damaged. Press the rain sensor firmly and evenly onto the windshield to prevent air pockets as these will adversely affect the automatic windshield operation. It may be indicated to connect the rain sensor before connecting the battery for recognition. You may also need to reset the rain sensor. -Determine Calibration Requirements – when determining calibration requirements for ADAS parts, the I-CAR RTS OEM Calibration Search tool can provide the ADAS options and OEM name. RTS also includes requirements and special tools here. From there, you can look up the service information referring to the vehicle’s specific make, model, and year of the vehicle. Advanced systems change throughout the years. Different cameras or sensors may be used, or they may be programmed to work with multiple systems. For example, an object detection camera on a late model vehicle may detect vehicles and pedestrians, and work with the collision mitigation system (CMS). An older model of the same vehicle may only detect lane markings on the road. Refer to the windshield or ADAS part removal and installation procedure to determine calibration requirements. -Most ADAS Cameras Require Calibration – expect most removed cameras to require calibration, especially if a new glass is installed. Don’t rely on a lit MIL or a pre-scan DTC to determine if calibration is required. Multiple calibrations may be required for different ADAS parts, or if the ADAS part works with more than one system. -Not Only Vehicle-Specific – ADAS calibration requirements are not only vehicle specific, but also depend on other factors. The model year is important when determining calibration requirements as well as the chosen options package. Object detection cameras are capable of many operations. They will only operate according to the chosen options package. For example, one vehicle might use a separate sensor for high-beam assist. A different model year with the same options package may use the object detection camera for high-beam assist. The CMS may also use the object detection camera. This may require multiple calibrations if the camera is removed and installed. -Static Camera Calibration – a static camera calibration procedure is done while the vehicle is parked. Use a specially designed target for the procedure. The aiming target and other special tools may be exclusive to dealership service facilities. Some vehicle makers provide digital copies of target for print. These must be printed to the correct size before using it for the calibration procedure. Place the targets precisely to ensure an accurate calibration. This may involve many measuring steps. Static calibration may require a large amount of space. This can be done indoors with minimal background light. The procedure may be done using a scan tool, display menu, or both. -Static Camera Calibration Considerations – to ensure an accurate calibration, the vehicle structure must be restored to proper specifications. A wheel alignment may also be required. Follow all of the steps in the vehicle-specific calibration procedure. This may include ensuring the vehicle is on a level surface, the vehicle is empty, and the tires are the correct size and inflated properly. Some vehicle makers may require the calibration procedure be done only on approved wheel alignment equipment. Static camera calibration procedures often require many steps and require the use of diagnostic tools. -Dynamic (Drive) Camera Calibration – some calibration procedures require the vehicle to be driven, known as a dynamic calibration. During this drive, the scan tool is connected. Follow the instructions in the service information and the scan tool. A dynamic camera calibration procedure typically requires consistent driving conditions for a specified amount of time. Conditions may include maintaining a minimum driving speed on a road with lane markings and fair weather. Avoid rain, fog, or snow, which may block the camera’s view and interfere with aiming. Honda requires both static and dynamic aiming procedures to calibrate the object detection camera on some models. The dynamic aiming procedure must be completed within 30 minutes after the static aiming procedure. -Communication and Documentation – with ADAS becoming more common, collision repair facilities, glass installers, and damage appraisers must be aware of any extra steps involved with windshield replacement or removal. Most object detection cameras require a calibration procedure to ensure they are working properly before returning the vehicle to its owner. The vehicle owner expects all systems to function properly after repairs. The calibration procedure may have to be sublet to a dealership if the calibration tools are only available to them. Include the documentation of all calibration procedures in the repair order. Working Safely Around Hazardous Materials (1/2) Hazardous Materials Overview Hazardous Material Exposure -Acute and Chronic Exposure – over exposure to hazardous materials can be acute, chronic or both acute and chronic -Acute – acute health effects either appear immediately or appear within a few hours of exposure to a hazardous material. Some signs of an acute exposure include: -Burns -Eye irritation -Runny nose -Sore throat or cough -Skin rash or redness -Shortness of breath -Fatigue or dizziness -Nausea, chills, or other flu-like symptoms -Chronic – chronic health effects result from repeated long-term exposure to a hazardous material. Some signs of a chronic exposure include: -Extra sensitivity -Nerve damage -Lower lung capacity -Asthma symptoms -Olfactory or Sensory Fatigue – olfactory or sensory fatigue is a phenomenon that occurs when you are exposed to a chemical for a period of time. You will become unable to smell the chemical or hazardous material after a period of time, even though it is present in the area and over the allowable limit for exposure -Containing a Hazardous Spill – there are certain hazardous materials in the work environment that may end up getting spilled. Certain steps should be taken to contain a hazardous material spill. -Evacuate – you should evacuate the area when necessary. For example, it is necessary to evacuate when noxious odors are present or when it is obvious that the spill cannot be contained to one area -Fire Department – it may be necessary to alert the fire department when a hazardous spill cannot be contained -Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) – put on the proper personal protective equipment or clothing -Absorbent Material – contain the spill by spreading absorbent material on the liquid. If necessary, create a berm with the absorbent material to prevent the hazardous liquid from spreading. You may also use an absorbent “snake” to create a portable berm -Sweep Up – once contained and absorbed, you will need to sweep up the absorbent material. Treat the absorbent material as a hazardous waste material by disposing of it in a hazardous waste container. If there is a visible film left on the floor after cleanup, use shop towels to clean it up. Dispose of the towels as if they are a hazardous waste -Routes of Entry to the Body – there are multiple routes for hazardous materials to enter your body. -Breathing – breathing is the most common method of entry for hazardous materials to the body. This is due to how easily and quickly contaminated air can be accidently inhaled -Swallowing – swallowing does not refer to eating or drinking the hazardous materials. It refers to engaging in unsanitary practices such as not washing your hands before eating, drinking, or smoking in an area where hazardous materials are present or stored. Touching your hands to your face when sneezing or coughing also enables exposure -Absorption – absorption through the skin or eyes are also common routes of entry. Skin is porous, like a sponge, which includes the top of the head where chemicals are likely to land. Common ways that hazardous materials are absorbed into the skin or eyes is by picking up a solvent-soaked cloth, washing hands with gasoline or other solvents, and rubbing your eyes -Injection – injection of hazardous materials into your skin includes entering your body through a rash, a cut, or split in your skin. The end of your finger near the fingernail is especially prone to splitting. Materials can be forced through the skin by air tools or cleaning equipment Hazardous Material Categories -Hazardous Materials in a Collision Repair Facility – hazardous materials that may be found in a collision repair facility are grouped into the following categories- -Isocyanates -Bloodborne pathogens -Reactives and flammables -Corrosives -Toxins -Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) -Irritants -Carcinogens -Allergens -Isocyanates – isocyanates are used to cure certain urethane materials, and are sever respiratory, skin, and eye irritants -Catalysts and Hardeners – isocyanates are a common ingredient in many catalysts or hardeners. Catalyzed finishing products include many of the most common refinishing materials. Many adhesives and body fillers are also catalyzed with isocyanate-containing hardeners. Isocyanate vapors are released when mixing, pouring, and applying these products. They are also released when welding a panel with a catalyzed finish residue -Sensitivity – isocyanates can also lead to your skin or lungs becoming extremely sensitive to exposure. Once sensitized, even a vary small exposure can trigger an adverse reaction. If your lungs become sensitized, you can be subject to severe asthma attacks. Symptoms include shortness of breath, coughing, wheezing, and tightness in the chest. Evidence indicates that isocyanate sensitization can also be caused by skin exposure. Sensitized skin reactions may include a rash, itching, hives, and swelling of the arms and legs -Exposure Time – sensitized skin reactions could be immediate or delayed for hours, and sensitization can become permanent. Any worker sensitize to isocyanates should not work with these products. Isocyanates have no taste or smell, making it impossible to determine if a worker is being overexposed. A NIOSH-approved, supplied-air, full-face, or hood respirator that isolates a refinishing technician from the workplace air is the best protection when applying products containing isocyanates -PPE – isocyanates are also released when a product is opened and mixed. Butyl rubber gloves are recommended to prevent skin exposure. Painters goggles are also recommended to prevent or reduce eye exposure. If an isocyanate-containing finish splashes on bare skin, wash the exposed area with soap and water for 15 minutes -Bloodborne Pathogens – bloodborne pathogens include HIV and hepatitis B viruses that may be present in blood stains. Detailing technicians may be at the highest risk for exposure. -Centers for Disease Control (CDC) – according to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), HIV is detectable by tissue-culture techniques 1-3 days after drying, but the rate of inactivation is rapid. The hepatitis B virus can live at least one week, and possibly up to 30 days in a blood stain outside the body. Following any chance of exposure to bloodborne pathogens, employees are instructed to see a physician. Those at high risk of exposure to bloodborne pathogens should receive further training on avoiding exposure and the required steps to take in the event of exposure -OSHA – bloodborne pathogen training should satisfy the OSHA requirement for standard 29 CFR 1910. 1030. For workplaces exposed to bloodborne pathogens, the OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens standard establishes specific requirements for labeling, containment, and disposal of waste material contaminated with blood. The standard also requires that employers develop and implement a written exposure control plan that includes provisions for hepatitis B vaccinations. This plan must be reviewed and updated annually. More information on bloodborne pathogens can be found on the OSHA standard 29 CR 1910. 1030 OSHA website -Reactives and Flammables – reactives can become unstable or undergo rapid or violent chemical reactions when heated or mixed with other materials. Flammables have a low flash point, and must be kept away from heat sources and open flames. Some common examples include battery acid, anti-corrosion compounds, petroleum-based solvents, glazing putty, adhesion promoters and adhesives, fuels, and most refinish materials -Corrosives – corrosives are either highly acidic or alkaline. Wearing neoprene gloves, a rubber apron, goggles, and a face shield will provide proper personal protection. Some common examples of corrosives include battery (sulfuric) acid (besides being reactive, it is also a corrosive), chemical paint strippers, full-strength degreasers and sodium hydroxide -Neuro or Nerve Toxins – neuro or nerve toxins destroy nerve endings and may cause central nervous system depression. The effects of this are similar to drinking too many alcoholic beverages. Neuro or nerve toxins include toluene, xylene, and methyl-ethyl ketone. These chemicals are present in many solvents, adhesives, and finishes. Read the SDS or product label to see if any of these chemicals are present in the material you are working with. Some common examples include weld-through primers, glazing putty, rubbing compound, some solvents and adhesives, urethanes, clearcoats, buffing compounds, and polishes -Blood Toxins – blood toxins destroy or deform red blood cells, which reduces the amount of oxygen carried through the bloodstream. This can lead to difficulty breathing and unconsciousness. Some common examples include some aerosol cleaners, finish removers, some adhesive cleaners, acrylic enamels, and reducers -Liver Toxins – liver toxins usually enter the body when breathing vapors while pouring, mixing, or applying products. Effects on the body are determined by the length and intensity of exposure to the chemical. These toxins are contained in toluene, xylene, and butyl acetate. Look at the SDS or material label for these chemicals. Some common examples include glass adhesives and seam sealers, brake cleaner and parts cleaning fluid, topcoat additives, reducers, and hardeners -Reproductive Toxins – reproductive toxins may cause birth defects or sterility. Some common examples include gasoline, brake fluid, and any material containing lead, such as solder -Irritants – irritants include skin, eye, and lung irritants. Skin and eye irritants can cause itching, burning, and rashes. Lung irritants include: -Upper respiratory, which affect the nose and throat and are normally not life-threatening -Middle respiratory, which affect the trachea and bronchial parts of the respiratory system; symptoms include coughing and wheezing and are normally not life-threatening -Lower respiratory, which travel deep into the lungs and can be life-threatening -Irritant Materials – some materials contain irritant materials that cause lower respiratory issues. These materials are made up of highly volatile thinners, such as acetone and 1-1-1 trichloroethane. These thinners are highly mobile and can easily penetrate human tissue. The working ingredients in these products are solids. The thinners are added to make other products that are easier to use. Some examples include: -Rubberized undercoatings, weld-through primers, adhesives, seam sealers, welding fumes, and glass adhesives -Glazing putties -Brake fluid, motor oil, gear oil, automatic transmission fluid, and power steering fluid -Carcinogens – certain materials contain known carcinogens (cancer-causing agents). This is a chronic effect of exposure to a chemical. These chemicals are listed by different agencies, such as OSHA, the United States National Toxicology Program (NTP), and the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). Some common examples include diesel fuel, engine oil, transmission fluid, asbestos (found in some brake pads and shoes), refrigerants, plastic filler dust, rubbing compound, body filler, chromates in some etching primers, chromium in some epoxy primers, and crystalline silica in some primer-surfaces -Allergens – allergens may cause people to react to certain chemicals. Normally, the reaction is not when that person is first exposed to a chemical. The reaction starts with the second or further exposures. It is difficult to know which materials will cause an allergic reaction because each person will have a different reaction to different materials. Some common examples include cleaners, adhesives, resins, hardeners, topcoat additives, polishes, and some dressings Working Safely Around Hazardous Materials (2/2) Personal Protective Equipment Protective Clothing and Eye Protection -Hand, Foot, and Body Protection – hazardous material regulations require employers to provide the proper personal protection where required. Selecting the appropriate protection can be confusing. More information on protective equipment is available from: -SDS information -Product makers -Product and equipment suppliers -Paint distributors and jobbers -Makers of PPE -Note: Equipment and material suppliers may be willing to work with repair facilities to help find equipment that workers are comfortable with and will actually use. The correct choice of protective clothing may be difficult. No one material is resistant to all chemicals, and no glove is completely impenetrable. Proper foot protection throughout the collision repair facility generally includes steel-toed leather shoes or boots with solvent-resistant soles -Hand Protection – types of hand protection used in a collision repair facility include disposable light-duty nitrile gloves for limited tasks where dexterity is required, and medium-duty nitrile gloves, which should be used when working with chemicals, solvents, and adhesives. Medium-duty nitrile gloves can be used multiple times. Neoprene gloves are designed for use with corrosive acids and alkalies. A neoprene glove is also designed for repeat use. Leather or cotton gloves help to protect against cuts and abrasions, and can be used multiple times. Leather gloves also protect against burns when welding -Eye and Face Protection – eye and face protection must be certified by United States standards -American National Standards Institute (ANSI) – United States standards are published by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). The ANSI symbol or standard number “Z87”must be printed on the eye or face protection equipment. More information on standards and selection of personal protective equipment can be found at the following website: www.ansi.org -Equipment – proper eye protection should be used where it is required. Proper eye and face protection also includes locating eye wash stations where they may be required, such as near the mixing room and detailing bays. Eye or face protection includes safety glasses or goggles. Goggles are recommended whenever working with refinish materials or solvents to prevent liquids splashing into your eyes. You should use a full-face shield when grinding or sanding. You should also wear a welding helmet when welding. Safety glasses should also be worn under the welding helmet -Welding Protection – the welding process involves many safety hazards, including ultraviolet ray exposure. When you are welding it, it is important to wear gloves, safety glasses, a respirator, a welding jacket, shoes, and a welding helmet. To prevent exposure, the following precautions should be taken. -Wear clothing that covers all parts of the body and a dark enough helmet lens shade. -Protect against flash burn to the eyes and skin. Say “cover” before striking an arc to protect those around you who may be in the area -Note: The American Welding Society (AWS) provides a lens shade range for various welding currents. As a starting point, a welding lens shade of 9-10 can be used for low power plasma cutting. A lens shade of 10-11 is recommended for GMA welding. Exposure to ultraviolet rays can also be caused by improper equipment maintenance. Some examples include cracks or scratches in the filter plate, damaged or missing lens gaskets, tears in welding gloves or other protective clothing. Repair or replace damaged equipment, as required Hearing Protection -Decibel Levels – exposure to high levels of noise causes hearing loss and may also cause other harmful health effects. Sound is measured in decibels (dB) -Allowable Sound Levels – the extent of damage depends primarily on the intensity of the noise and duration of the exposure. -Hearing Protection – depending on the location, hearing protection is required when noise exposures being to exceed 85 dB, averaged over 8 working hours, or an 8-hour time-weighted average (TWA). Hearing protection is recommended, but not required, when noise exposures are at 85 dB TWA. If over 90 dB, the average is applied over a shorter time period. The chart shows how the allowable duration decreases as the average noise level increases. Information on dB levels for specific equipment is provided by equipment makers. Having to raise your voice to be heard is a good indication that hearing protection is required. At 85 dB, it is necessary to raise your voice to be heard from 1 foot. You need to shout to be heard from 2 feet -OHSA – if the noise level in a workplace is over 85 dB TWA, OSHA requires establishment of a Hearing Conservation Program in the workplace. OSHA requires this program to include: -The distribution of hearing protection and instruction on how to use it -Identification of tasks that generate loud noise and those areas marked off as requiring hearing protection -Annual hearing tests, or audiograms, for those individuals that work in areas where noise exposures are at or above an 8-hour TWA of 85 dB -Ear Plugs and Ear Muffs – proper hearing protection includes ear plugs and ear muffs. Hearing protection is rated. There will be a noise reduction rating (NRR) for each type of hearing protection. The NRR is a single number description of the noise reduction capability of a hearing protection. The more protection, the higher the number. Makers of hearing protection provide NRR levels Respiratory Protection -Eliminating the Source – the first defense against breathing in contaminants in a collision repair facility is eliminating or minimizing the contaminants at the source. This includes using: -Vacuum sanding systems -Welding fume extractors -Vacuum-recovery media blasting -Downdraft spraybooths -Ventilated paint mixing benches or rooms -Paint mixing room fume extractors -HVLP spray guns -Note: Spray coatings should always be applied inside an approved spraybooth, and never in an open repair facility. Some areas have regulations on spraying materials -Move to Clean Air – in a case where a technician is overcome by fumes: -1) First move the technician outside or to an area of the repair facility that has clean air -2) You should then seek medical help by taking the technician to a medical facility or having a paramedic come to the repair facility -National Insitute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) – the second line of defense against breathing contaminants is a respirator. Any respirator for use in the workplace in North America must be approved by the National Insititue for Occupational Safety and Heatlh (NIOSH). NIOSH is responsible for testing and approving respirators. Respirators approved by NIOSH undergo a testing and certification process. The use of non-approved respirators is a violation of OSHA regulations and could result in citations and fines. Respirators must be used as designed to maintain approved ratings. Note: No modiciations or repairs that alter the respirator should be made -Air-Purifying Respirators – respirators can generally be divided into two types, air purifying or supplied air. Air-purifying respirators perform the following functions: -Filter the contaminated air through filter layers or absorbent cartridgesl and are full- or half-faced -Protect againts either vapors, particulates, or both -Usually have interchangable cartridges and pre-filters, so one respirator can be used to help protect against different respiratory hazards -Are considered negative-pressure, because the user must inhale to pull in the filtered air. This puts more pressure outside the mask than there is inside the mask, making it especially important that there are no that there are no leaks, since contaminated air enters through the path of least resistance. A battery-powered, air-purifying respirator is considered a positive-pressure, air-purifying respirator -May be disposable, for one-time use -Using cartridges which may have an expiration date. These dates must be calculated using air sample information and the manufacturer’s data. The cartridges are changed on or before the expiration date. -Note: Assistance on selecting the proper air-purfying respirator or cartridge for a given contaminant is available from makers of respirator equipment, chemical makers, suppliers, and jobbers. Nort, MSA, and 3M have an outline respirator change-out program that is available free of charge -Choosing the Proper Air-Purifying Respirator – when choosing the proper air-purifying respirator, it may be necessary to distinguish between particulates and vapors -Particulates – particulates are solid or liquid particles suspended in the air and include: -Fumes, which are the solid particulates given off by welding -Dusts, which are solid particulates from sanding or grinding -Dust particulates, which are larger than fume particulates -Mists, which are the liquid particulates when spraying -Dust/Mist Masks – layers of filtered material are required to filter out particulates. Dust/mist masks are used only for large particulates that can be seen, such as dust. They do not protect against hazardous contaminants because they are generally loose-fitting, and it is difficult to achieve a proper face seal -Vapors – vapors are created by the evaporation of liquids. Organic vapors are formed when a solvent or paint evaporates. Vapors require an absorbent material, which is usually activated carbon contained in a cartridge. The carbon in a filter is used to absorb vapors. Most vapor-cartridge respirators include a pre-filter for protection against both vapors and particulates. Paint spray, for example, is a combination of particulates and vapors -Color Codes – cartridge-type filters are color-coded to indicate the type of material each is designed to filter. These color codes have been set by NIOSH. For example, cartridges with a black color code are designed to protect against organic vapors. Purple or pink color codes are highyl efficient for protection against particulates. These filters used to be referred to as high-efficiency particular air (HEPA) filters. This designation is no longer used, though the filter still meets the filtration criteria for a HEPA filter. A yellow color code is a combination filter designed to protect against acid gases and organic vapors -Particulate Filter Classifications – NIOSH has developed a classification system for particulate filters -Particulate filter Efficency -the NIOSH system identifies a series of three particulate filters and rates them based on filtration efficiency. The three particulate filters include: -100-rated filters (99.97% efficiency), this filter offers similar protection to HEPA filters -99-rated filters (99% efficiency) -95-rated filters (95% efficiency) -Particulate Filter Categories – each are divided into three categories: -N for non-oil resistant -R for resistant to oil -P for oil-proof -Note: In some paint and body applications, a 95% efficient particulate filter is adequate. Oil-based products are generally not used, so a non-oil resistant (N) filter or oil-resistant ® filter is adequate. Currently, there are no specific guidelines for the selection of the appropriate efficiency rating -Particulate Filter Use – HEPA or 100-rated filters are used when working with asbestos, when welding toxis metals such as galvanized steel, and when buffing with products that contain silica. N95 filters can be used for general welding. A 100 filter can be used for general welding, but breathing resistance is higher. There is also a potential for exposure to hazardous vapors during some welding operations, which would require an air-purifying respirator that absorbers vapors. For welding, a supplied-air welding helmet would be the best protection. The hazards are reduced by removing coatings from surfaces that are to be welded -Choosing a Respirator – choosing the type of respirator to wear depends on the material being used. The first step is to check the SDS. The SDS might not be available for a particular material. For example, it may be necessary to sand or grind the finish off a part that has an unknown coating. In that case, use common sense and good judgement. You cannot be over-protected. A HEPA or 100-type cartridge respirator may be the first choice if there are unknown particulate fumes -Storing Air-Purifying Respirators – air-purifying respirators with cartridges must be stored away from any contaminated area and areas with high humidity and temperature extremes. The best storage is the airtight plastic bag that comes with most respirators. This is done primarily to prevent moisture contamination. Moisture will shorten the life of a charcoal-filled vapor cartridge. Note: Moisture will shorten the life of a charcoal-filled vapor cartridge -Supplied-Air Respirators – supplied-air respirators have an outside source of fresh, breathable air. Supplied-air respirators are primarily used when finishing in a spraybooth, but they are also required in environments that are oxygen-deficient, considered immediately threatening to your life or health, or contain unknown contaminants or unknown levels of contaminants. Areas that contain airborne concentrations of contaminants above the maximum use concentrations of air-purifying respirators also require supplied-air respirators. Areas that contain contaminants with poor warning properties, such as isocyanates, do as well. An exception to this is if there is a formal schedule in place to change air-purifying respirator cartridges -Grade D Specifications – there are currently nine grades of air classified by the United States Compressed Gas Association. The three highest grades are for use in medical facilities. A supplied-air respirator system must supply Grade D air, which is the fourth highest. Grade D air currently has requirements that call for oxygen content of 19.5%-23.5%. other requirements include: -Condensed oil content of less than 5 mg/m3, CO (carbon monoxide) of less than 10 ppm -The CO must always be monitored on a supplied air breathing system -CO2 (carbon dioxide) of less than 1000 ppm -Air Sources – air can be supplied by a compressor or an air pump -Compressor as a Source – one source of air for a respirator is an air compressor fitted with approved filters. When using an oil-lubricated compressor to supply Grade D air, the CO level must be monitored. This can be done using a high-temperature or carbon monoxide alarm, or both. If only a high-temperature alarm is used, the air supply must be monitored at enough interveals to prevent CO in the breathing air from exceeding 10 ppm. Proper maintenance of the compressor is also required. In the United States, the air must be sampled and analzyed before it reaches the end user. A multiple-stage filter is generally used to remove oil, water, hydrocarbons, and odors. A concern that an overheated compressor could burn oil and generate CO is the reason for the monitoring equipment. Another source of CO in an air line is the location of the compressor intake -Air Pump as a Source – using an air pump as the air source generally consists of an oil-free, electric, rotary-vane motor, filters, and a hose connection. The air pump intake must be located in a clean air environment, usually outside waya from any exhaust vents. This is necessary because an air pump does not purify the air of solvents, thinners, and other hazardous chemicals found in a repair facility environment. An air pump only moves air from one source to another. Advantages to using an air pump include portability (it can be placed anywhere electricity is available), it uses its own air (there is no worry about using up the repair facility’s compressor capacity to supply breathing air), and low maintenance -Protection from Isocyanates – full-face, supplied-air respirators or hoods are recommended when applying finishes that contain isocyanates. -Protect Information – information regarding protection from isocyanates is indicated in government information, product maker lierature, and SDS information. But there is an alternative, if certain conditions are met. As an alternative to formal change-out schedules, painters can use respiratory cartridges equipped with end-of-service-life indicators that provide users a visual sign, such as a color change, indicating when the filter should be changed. ESLls have not yet been approved to detect the type of isocyanates used in refinishing materials. Therefore, a calculated change-out schedule should be used. Still another alternative is a disposable air-purifying cartridge respirator for one-time use. The reason for these extra precautions is because isocyanates do not have good warning properties. An organic vapor cartridge could be used to capacity without warning. Since isocyanates can enter the body through the eyes, hoods or full-face shields are recommended for protection. Safety glasses or prescription eyewear do no offer enough protection for refinishers. If a half-face, supplied-air respirator is all that is available, wear goggles -OSHA – the revised OSHA respiratory protection standard allows the use of an air-purifying respirator when applying an isocyanate coating, but only if the following two requirements are met: -1) The employer ensures that the spraybooth is functioning properly and is properly maintained -2) The employer implements a formal respiratory cartridge change-out schedule to ensure that painters change organic vapor cartridges before the cartridges become saturated with contaminants -Respirator Seal – half-face air-purifying respirators must have a proper seal. This requires male respirator wearers to be clean shaven, at least where the respirator seals against the face. An employee should not be allowed to do a task that requires respiratory protection if he refuses to shave to allow a tight respirator seal until a full-face respirator is made available. An employee must also not be allowed to do a task that requires respiratory protection if he or she refuses to wear a respirator. Regulations regarding how to handle an employee with facial hair are NIOSH recommendations that OSHA has adopted -Medical Approved – certain information is needed for a physican to approve a respirator for a technician. -Medical Approval – the physician or other licensed healthcare provider must be provided the following information -Type and weight of the respirator to be used by the employee -Duration and frequency of respirator use -Expected physical work effort -Additional protective clothing and equipment to be worn -Temperature and humidity extremes that may be present -Copy of the written respirator program -Note: If a questionnaire is used, the employer may have to provide a follow-up medical examination, based on the questionnaire responses to the employee’s history of medical conditions. The follow-up examination must include any medical tests, consultations, or procedures the physician or healthcare provider considers necessary. The employee must be provided the opportunity to discuss the questionnaire or examination with the physican or other licensed healthcare provider. If the medical examination shows that the employees helth would be at risk by using a negative pressure respirator, the employer is required to provide a powered air-purifying respirator or supplied-air respirator -Additional Medical Evaluations – additional medical evaluations are required if: -The employee reports medical signs or symptoms related to the ability to use a respirator -The physician, licensed healthcare provider, supervisor, or respirator program administrator informs the employer that the employee neds to be re-evaluated -Observations during fit-testing or other respirator program evaluation shows a need for re-evaluation -A change occurs in the workplace conditions or employees responsibility that will change the respirator use -Respirator Fit-Testing – -Respirators with a face seal must be properly fit-tested before using the respirator on the job. OSHA states fit-testing must be done: -Annually -Whenever a different respirator facepiece is used -If there is a change in the employees physical condition which could affect respirator fit. Examples include dental work, significant weight change, or facial scars -Fit-testing not only determines whether the respirator face seal is adequate, it also: -Provides an opportunity to check the the respirator fit is comfortable -Allows the employee to choose another, more comfortable respirator if desired -Reinforces respirator training, such as how to put on and adjust the respirator -Partially fulfills some of the annual respirator training requirements -Respirator Program – United States regulatinos require employers to develop and implement a written respiratory protection program. -Program Written Documentation – United States regulations require employers to develop and implement a written respiratory protection program. The program must be updated as often as necessary to reflect the changes in workplace conditions that affect respirator use. Items that must be put into writing include: -Worksite-specific procedures that require a respirator -The criteria for selecting a respirator for use in the workplace -Medical evaulations or questionnaire results of employees required to use respirators -Fit-testing procedures for air-purifying respirators with a face seal -Procedures for proper use of respirators in routine and emergency situations -Other Written Requirements – other written requirements for a respirator program include procedures and schedules for cleaning, disinfecting, storing, inspecting, repairing, discarding, and otherwise maintaining respirators. They also include an air-purifying cartridge change-out schedule, procedures on how the quality, quantity, and flow of breathing air is being maintained for supplied-air respirators. They should include records of training employees in the respiratory hazards to which they are potentially exposed during routine and emergency situations. They should include records of training of employees in the proper use of respirators, including putting on respirator program for effectiveness. For areas of the repair facility where respirator use is not required, employers still must have a situation where a written program is not required is where a dust mask is the only type of mask used. Respirators, training, and medical evaluations must be provided by the employer at no cost to the employee. A program administrator must be designed to administer or oversee the respiratory protection program, and conduct the required evaluations of the program’s effectiveness. The administrator must be qualified by the proper training or experience Workplace Safety Repair Facility Safety Work and Tool Safety -Facility Safety Equipment – todays collision repair facility has many different types of safety equipment available to the staff. For this equipment to be effective, its important that all employees have a clear understanding of where this equipment is located and how to use the equipment. Such equipment includes eye wash stations, fire extinguishers, and emergency shutoff switches. In addition, knowing where emergency exits are located is also important -Safety in the Repair Facility – solids, liquids, and gases can all be dangerous if handled unsafely. Some examples of equipment or situations that can cause injury include: -Exposed fuel tanks or containers -Compressed natural gas (CNG) -Handling or transporting glass using suction cups -An exposed or operating engine -Working with batteries -Welding -Safe Work Practices with Fuel – -Working Around Fuel – whenever working with or around fuel, refer to those safe work practices and: -DO keep fuel and fuel tanks away from sparks and other potential sources of ignition -DO have a proper fire extinguisher available -DO NOT turn ON ignition or crank an engine with a fuel line disconnected -DO NOT prime engine with fuel while cranking the engine -DO relieve fuel pressure before performing any engine repairs -DO work in a well-ventilated area -DO NOT use as a cleaning agent -DO identify air conditioning and fuel rail access ports before attaching test equipment -DO post and comply with “No Smoking” signs in the area -Fuel Containers – when working around fuel containers: -Store fuel only in UL-approved containers -DO NOT fill containers completely with liquid fuel; leave about 1 inch for expansion -If filled containers must be transported, make sure they are secured to prevent tipping -DO NOT store a partially filled container for long periods of time -Never leave containers open after using the container -Use a ground strap to limit the chance of static electricity causing a fire -Note: Gasoline MUST only be stored in an approved red container -Alternative Fuels – when working near compressed fuel vehicles, such as CNG or liquefied petroleum gas (LPG): -Turn off the gas supply at the tank, and run the engine until it stops. Then, disconnect the battery before welding, grinding, or cutting on a vehicle -Remove LPG tanks before moving the vehicle into a spraybooth -Release CNG before moving the vehicle into a spraybooth. Empty the cylinder by opening the manual release valve before bringing the vehicle inside the repair facility -Wear proper hearing and eye protection, as the releasing pressure sound could cause hearing damage and flying objects could cause an eye injury -Note: When servicing a CNG-powered vehicle, do not operate infrared heaters (IR) that are suspended from the ceiling. Open any ceiling vents -Engine Compartment – when working around an engine compartment – -Wear proper eye and skin protection -Avoid long hair, loose clothing, and jewelry, these can easily get caught in moving parts -Avoid touching hot engine parts -Avoid breathing exhaust fumes -Vent exhaust fumes outside of the repair facility -Keep hands away from fan blades and other moving parts, as an electric engine cooling fan may start at any time -Remove the ignition key to prevent accidental starting of the engine -Engage the parking brake and use wheel chocks to prevent the vehicle from moving when working under the hood or underneath the vehicle -Use safety props when working under hoods and deck lids -Automotive Batteries – when working around automotive batteries: -Wear proper eye and skin protection -DO NOT smoke, or have open flames or sparks near a battery -DO NOT remove vent caps from maintenance-free batteries -DO NOT charge or jump-start a frozen battery. If charging, ensure that the battery charger is turned off before the clamps are connected or disconnected -Read the markings on the battery to determine the polarity of the terminals -Ensure that all electrical loads are off before disconnecting or reconnecting battery terminals, and always disconnect and isolate the negative (ground) cable first, and reconnect the ground cable last -DO NOT over charge or exceed charge rate of the battery, verify in service information -Parts Handling and Storage – for proper parts handling and storage: -Wear appropriate PPE when handling parts -Store parts in a safe area, not inside the vehicle -It’s not advised to store heavy parts high up -Care will need to be taken when moving dangerous parts such as glass or sharp objects -Note: Never carry glass under your arm or over your head. Hold the glass with your palms outward so that it can only fall away from you -Welding Hazards – the welding process involves many safety hazards -Welding Fumes – by breathing welding fumes, symptoms similar to a 24-hour flu may occur within 4-8 hours of exposure. Methods of protecting from welding fumes include: -Wearing a respirator, such as a supplied-air welding helmet, or by having a source of fresh air to breathe -Using a fume extractor, such as the one shown in the image -Having a fan, or other source, for circulating the air -Welding Electrical Shock – to avoid electrical shock from a welding machine -Configure the welding machines according to the equipment makers instructions, and ensure proper grounding connections are used -Keep cables, wires, and connections in good condition -Do not place the welding machine in a wet place, or stand in a wet place when welding -Do not use the welding machine as a table for beverages Storage Regulations -Storage Regulations – proper storage for hazardous materials include: -A neat and orderly cabinet with doors that can be kept closed -Keeping away from sunlight or extreme conditions -a well-ventilated area -Proper labels or signs -Meeting federal and local requirements -Keeping away from fuse panels -Container Requirements – proper containers for hazardous materials must: -Be in good condition -Be sealed or covered when not in use -Contain proper labeling -Have a secondary curb or tray, if required -Grounding Requirements – some containers must be grounded to eliminate the chance of sparks. This includes; -Cabinets with flammable materials -Containers used when transferring flammable materials -Storage drums -Paint mixing tables -Flammables and Combustibles – materials that display the flammable pictogram must adhere to specific regulations. This includes having: -Explosion-proof electrical equipment -“NO SMOKING” signs posted -Proper venting on tanks and the room -Fire extinguishers nearby Repair Facility Maintenance and Emergency Handling -Maintenance and Emergencies – poor maintenance can result in equipment breakdown and accidents. Emergencies are best handled when there is a plan in place to handle spills, fires, evacuations, etc. Every work place is required to have these plans in writing -Areas of Possible Emergencies – emergencies at a collision repair facility can take place anywhere and when using any tool. Some of the more probable areas include: -Hydraulic lines used on straightening equipment -Solvent Recyclers -Lifts -Paint mixing room -Compressor unit or lines/hoses -Spraybooth -Office -Hydraulics – safety considerations for hydraulic power systems include: -Clearly identifying pressure lines; these lines must be protected from damage -Working with pressures regulated within specified limits -Emergency stops being fully visible and operational -Making safety cables or chains available -Having an inspection and maintenance schedule for pulling clamps, chains, etc. -Solvent Recyclers – solvent recycling systems heat and distill used solvents -Solvent Recycler – an equipment makers recommendations for inspecting and maintaining this equipment may require: -An annual oil change -An annual gasket replacement -Dust removal from the condenser coils -Note: Do not use a spray gun cleaner as a recycler for leftover paint materials -Solvent Recycler Sludge – depending on the materials being recycled, and local and regional codes, the leftover solvent-recycler sludge may be: -Collected in a closed drum and removed by a waste hauler -Subject to a one-time Toxic Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) test to determine if it must be treated as hazardous waste -Dried and disposed of as non-hazardous waste -Areas of Possible Emergencies – -Vehicle Lifts – safety requirements for vehicle lifts include identifying load capacity, which must not be exceeded, having all safety guards in place, limit stops working properly, hand and foot controls being operational, operators being properly trained in the use of equipment, and scheduling periodic equipment inspections. If the lift operates erratically, it should not be used -Mixing Room – a paint mixing room should provide a safe, clean, well-lit area for a refinisher to store and mix refinishing materials. The mixing room: -Should be located near the spraybooth -Must be constructed to meet building, fire, and electrical codes -Should have sufficient ventilation, or fume extractors installed -Spraybooth – spraybooths must have proper airflow to quickly remove vapors, fumes, and paint overspray. Spraybooth maintenance will help ensure proper operation. Maintenance may include; changing filters according to the spraybooth makers recommendations, checking the spraybooth pressure daily, cleaning air hoses frequently, preferably daily, cleaning and adjusting spraybooth burners to give the proper flame at maximum efficiency, and keeping the spraybooth clean of any dust, dirt, and debris. A spraybooth is not an emission control device. The spraybooth filters are designed to capture solid particulates only. Compliance with rules for VOCs may require the exhaust air to be treated with equipment installed outside the spraybooth. Another method of reducing VOC emissions is using waterborne or high-solids refinishing materials. Maintaining a water-wash spraybooth filter system requires checking the pump motors, spray nozzles, and filter tanks regularly, and treating the water with proper chemicals to prevent algae growth or other problems -Floors – some floor safety requirements include; keeping the surface clean, providing a non-slip surface, where required, and using floor drains that must include grates. Another requirement may include being connected to a holding tank, grease trap, or sump which pumps to a holding tank. Note: Frame rack surfaces are especially slippery if dust is present. Also, oil on most surfaces can be slippery -Compressor – regularly checking and maintaining the shop compressor is required for proper operation. Air compressors can start at any time when the power is on. Ensure equipment is powered off before conducting maintenance to avoid injury. This process includes following the equipment makers recommendations for draining fluid from the air tank, receivers, dryers, and filters. It also includes checking and filling the oil reservoir, cleaning the air strainers, and cleaning or blowing dust off the fins of cylinders, heads, intercoolers, aftercoolers, and any other parts that collect dust or dirt. Other compressor cleaning and maintenance steps include checking the oil filter/separator in the air line, checking the tightness of the drive belts, checking for air leaks on the compressor and piping system, and checking the automatic tank drain, and listening for unusual noises -Written Emergency Plan – United States regulations require every workplace to have a written emergency plan, appropriate to the hazards in the workplace. The plan must include: -Emergency conditions that may arise within the workplace and from nearby workplaces -An evacuation plan -Spill cleanup procedures -Assigned rescue and medical duties -Training procedures -Written Evacuation Plan – -Steps in the evacuation part of the emergency plan should have written procedures to: -Notify workers of the nature and location of the emergency -Evacuate workers safely -Check and confirm the safe evacuation of all workers -Part of the written evacuation plan should also include: -Getting the applicable Safety Data Sheet(s) (SDS) for the hazardous materials involved -Notifying the fire department or other emergency responders -Notifying adjacent workplaces or residents that may be affected -Note: Practice meeting in a safe location outside the facility at a central point. Assign one or more workers the responsibility for ensuring that everyone is present at the meeting place following an emergency -Hazardous Material Spill Safety Procedures – there are specific procedures to follow depending on the type of hazardous material spill -Non-Containable Spill – if the spill cannot be contained: -Report the spill immediately to the local fire department or other authorities -Evacuate all personnel from the area -Have the SDS available for cleanup personnel -Dry Hazardous Spill – if a dry hazardous spill occurs: -Use a HEPA-filtered vacuum to collect fine dust, such as dust from fiberglass and asbestos -If a vacuum is not available, lightly wet the dust with water and sweep it up -Do not use compressed air to blow the dust -Materials used to clean up the spill must be disposed of as hazardous waste Workplace Education -Hazardous Materials Education Responsibilities – three groups share in the responsibility of providing hazardous materials education: -Makers or suppliers -Employers -Employees -Supplied Responsibilities – education on hazardous materials begins with the supplier. The supplier is required to: -Classify and label supplied materials -Provide a current SDS for every hazardous materials used in a workplace -Provide, at the request of an inspector, the source for any data about the toxicity of a material -Employer Responsibilities – employers are required to have procedures established for the safe use, handling, storage, and disposal of hazardous materials. This includes personal protective equipment. An employer is also required to enforce safe work practices for use, handling, storage, and disposal of chemicals. Employers are also required to provide: -Labels for all unmarked containers of hazardous materials -An SDS for every material -A Right-To-Know training program -Employee Responsibilities – to get the most out of a hazardous materials program, employees should: -Work with the employer to follow the hazardous materials program -Ensure all required labels are on the appropriate containers -Follow directions on supplier and workplace labels, and do not remove, deface, or change labels -Follow procedures for safe use, storage, handling, and disposal of hazardous materials -Know the location of, how to use, and review the SDS -Know emergency procedures involving a hazardous material -Inform the employer if a material lacks hazard information -Wear the required personal protective equipment -Work with the employer on developing a safety program -Posting Requirements – employers are required to provide signage in the workplace regarding: -Emergency telephone numbers -Exit signs -Signs prohibiting eating, smoking, or drinking, where appropriate -Safety and health posters -Hazardous Materials Inventory List – -The employer is also responsible for taking inventory of all hazardous materials and keeping an inventory list. There are two types of lists that can be developed. -A complete list of all materials used in the workplace -A list of materials used in specific work areas -Either list is acceptable and must include -The material name -Where the chemical is used -Quantity of hazardous material -Who made the list and the date of creation or revision -The area of the facility the list refers to -Inventories can be done by: -Counting materials -Referring to purchase invoices -Looking at the SDS sheets -Written Hazardous Communication Program – each workplace is responsible for starting and maintaining a written hazardous communication program for all employees who work with hazardous materials. The program must include: -A list of the hazards of the materials in the work area -Methods used to inform employees of the hazards of non-routine tasks, such as changing brake fluid or recharging an air conditioning system -Methods for labeling using an “other means of identification” system, where this is used -Methods used by the employer to ensure the proper SDS copies are accessible in the work areas -Hazardous Material Training – employers are required to provide training on hazardous materials. This training must include: -Methods that be used to detect the presence or release of a hazardous materials in the work area -The physical and health hazards of the materials in the work area -Measures employees can take to protect themselves from the hazards -The information included in the hazardous communication program developed by the program Writing the Estimate How to Create an Accurate Estimate Preliminary Inspection -Course Overview – using information from the damage analysis courses and Basic Estimate Writing, this course looks at the physical process of reviewing a damaged vehicle and writing N estimate. The major steps in writing an estimate are to: -Obtain preliminary information such as vehicle, customer, and insurance information, and ask the customer about the collision -Review the damage -Record details about the repair in terms of labor operations, labor times, part types, refinishing operations, and miscellaneous repair expenses -Review the estimate with the vehicle owner and obtain repair authorization -Information Gathering – before the vehicle inspection, review the loss details in the claim file or assignment. When possible, it is a good idea to consult with the owner as well. A customer consultation can provide valuable information regarding the loss such as: -Details about the accident such as speed, direction of impact, road conditions, and which seatbelts were in use -Observations since the accident such as noises, pulling, drivability, malfunction indicator lamps (MILs), and accessories that no longer work -Temporary repairs that were done after the collision -Pre-existing damage -Note: Some of this information can be valuable when looking for signs of secondary damage resulting from energy transfer -Where to Start – it is important to have a consistent routine for writing estimates. This includes establishing a sequence for capturing vehicle identification information and a standard approach to inspecting a vehicle. An example inspection procedure may include starting with identifying the vehicle. This includes recording the vehicle identification number (VIN), license number, production date, and paint and trim codes. Next, complete an initial vehicle walkaround. Begin your damage inspection starting with the primary area of damage and thoroughly inspecting one part group at a time. The sequence in which you choose to complete your estimate is not as important as establishing a routine that you follow for every vehicle inspection. This will help to ensure all vehicle inspections result in a complete, thorough, and accurate estimate of repairs -Vehicle Walkaround – starting with a vehicle walkaround allows you to consider information obtained earlier regarding the facts of loss as well as the observations provided from the vehicle owner. Your initial walkaround should include looking for structural damage indicators and identifying direct and indirect damage. Also look for signs of previous repairs and pre-existing damage. When pre-existing damage is identified, complete a fully itemized estimate for these repairs using the pre-existing damage function within your estimating system. This allows you to document the damage without including it in the claim-related damage estimate -Approaching a Damaged Electric or Other Alternative Fuel Vehicle – when approaching an electric vehicle or other alternative fuel vehicle, be aware that the collision may have comprised alternative fuel safety systems and present a potential hazard. When working with an electric vehicle, always assume that the high-voltage (HV) circuit is energized even though steps have been taken to disable the system. After a collision, anything is possible. Do not wear metallic objects or jewelry. Do not have metal objects, such as mechanical pencils or tools, in your pockets. A metallic object may fall from a pocket onto an HV part or connection and cause a short circuit. Make sure your skin is not wet and there is no moisture present on or around the vehicle -Damage Inspection – if the estimate is being written at a collision repair facility, the next step is full disassembly and blueprinting of the vehicle. However, for a field estimate, it may be necessary to complete an estimate of visible damage followed by a supplemental inspection after the vehicle has been disassembled. When performing your damage inspection, remember to work with one part group/system at a time, carefully inspecting all parts of that group/system before moving on to the next. Take all required photos such as four corners, VIN, and license plate before beginning the disassembly process. Then, take photos to document the damage identified during the disassembly and blueprinting process -Thorough Damage Inspection – using the blueprinting process provides a thorough and complete damage inspection. Some examples of tasks that should be performed during the blueprinting process include: -Disassembling and inspecting of all damaged areas -Verifying gaps prior to opening doors, hoods, deck lids, and hatches. Opening these closure panels that have no clearance can cause additional damage -Trying all electrical systems (lights, horn, radio, door switches, and climate control) -Documenting MILs illuminated on the instrument panel -Raising the vehicle for inspection if underbody damage is suspected -Performing point-to-point measurements to verify structural or suspension damage -Reviewing the pre-health scan to identify any trouble codes and necessary repairs -Reviewing vehicle maker repair procedures to identify mandatory items such as one-time use fasteners and calibration or initialization requirements -How Previous Repairs Affect the Estimate – when performing vehicle inspections, it is important to look for signs of previous repairs that could have an impact on repair decisions for the current damages. For example, if previous repairs have been performed on a panel that is also part of the current damage, it is possible the combination of prior repairs and current damage will make replacing the panel the best decision. Previous repairs are often indicated by plug welds, flange variations, or a thicker finish that requires identification using a film-thickness gauge. You should also look for corrosion that may complicate the repair, and/or refinish process, making panel replacement the best decisions -Repair vs Replace – when evaluating a damaged panel, the decision to repair or replace is often a complex one. There are several items that need to be considered, such as panel repairability and cost-effective repairs -Repairability – for example, with regard to repairability, a panel may look repairable and could actually be repaired. But due to the location and type of damage, the long-term durability of the repair is a concern. Therefore, the panel should be replaced -Cost-Effective – an example of a cost-effective repair decision may be a panel that is repairable, but the expense of the panel makes replacing the panel the best choice. One consideration may be that a part is on backorder and not available. After factoring in the additional expense for a rental vehicle and the inconvenience of customers being without their vehicle, the more cost-effective decision may be to repair the panel. -Additional Input – when completing your damage inspection and making repair and replace decisions, there is often damage that requires additional input. For example, a panel may appear repairable, but the location of the damage may make the repair difficult, or a vehicle with a custom finish may require additional repair time or materials to duplicate the finish. In these cases, it is good practice to consult with a repair technician or production manager to discuss alternatives that ensure you select the best option for a complete, safe, and quality repair -Sublet Repairs – when writing for sublet repairs, it is important to contact the sublet vendor to confirm their availability. Finding a sublet vendor that can fit seamlessly into the repair schedule helps ensure cycle time is not disrupted. When contacting the vendor, provide the details of the repairs to be sublet so accurate pricing can obtained. This will ensure the estimate is written as accurate as possible -Glass Repairs – when replacing, consider that not all glass is the same for each model of vehicle. You must check the vehicle options. For example, vehicles equipped with a head-up display (HUD) may require a special type of windshield. Installing the wrong type of windshield may result in a double or distorted HUD image. Other common information required when ordering glass replacement or service include (if equipped): -Acoustic glass -Advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS) such as rain detection, lane departure warning sensors, or cameras -Heated glass or heated wipers -Window tint, which may require you to identify between aftermarket and factory window tinting -The frit, which is the black band around the perimeter of the stationary glass Estimate Preparation Considerations -General Considerations – when performing damage inspections, there are some additional items to keep in mind including: Overhaul, Sectioning, OEM service requirements -Overhaul – when repairs require replacement of multiple parts of an assembly, the estimating database may offer an overhaul labor operation. There are efficiencies gained by replacing multiple parts of an assembly at the same time rather than individual times for each part of the assembly. Commonly overhauled assemblies include: Bumper assemblies, suspension systems, steering columns. -Sectioning – when evaluating part replacement, partial replacement at factory seams or sectioning may be an option. This is generally a less intrusive repair and may require less disassembly of the vehicle. Always refer to vehicle maker service information to determine if there is a sectioning procedure, or if the part is supplied as a partial assembly. If the vehicle maker does not provide a procedure, the part should not be sectioned. -OEM Service Requirements – when preparing an estimate, it is important to reference vehicle maker service information to identify: -Types of construction material and locations to confirm repairability -Required supplemental restraint system (SRS) part inspection and replacement following a restraint system deployment -One-time use fasteners -Required SRS and ADAS calibrations -Note: Remember that late model vehicles are equipped with many integrated SRS and ADAS that may have very specific service requirements. Identifying these requirements during the estimating process helps ensure a complete and accurate repair plan -Front-End Damage Inspection Considerations – when preparing an estimate on a vehicle with front-end collision damage, inspection items often include ADAS, lighting, the colling system, the A/C system, and steering and suspension. In some cases, your estimating system may provide a reminder of these considerations -ADAS – many late model vehicles have radar sensors and cameras mounted in the grille and bumper area. These require inspection and calibration even if the repair only involves R&amp;I of system parts. For example, if collision repairs require R&amp;I of the windshield, a calibration of the forward-facing camera system may be required after the windshield is reinstalled -Lighting – collision repairs might include remove and install, called R&amp;I, or remove and replace, called R&amp;R. with front lamps, there are some items that should be added to the estimate. Include aiming of the headlamps following installation and calibration. Also, include initialization requirements for vehicles equipped with ADAS such as adaptive headlamps, high beam assist, and night vision -Cooling – when parts of a cooling system must be replaced, such as a radiator or damaged hose, the system may need to be drained, refilled, and bled. Often the estimating software will automatically add these operations to the estimate, but be sure to verify it is an included operation. This should be done each time a cooling part is R&amp;R’d or R&amp;I’d. sometimes a system must be topped off with coolant after it is refilled, even if the coolant is captured and recycled. You may need to add this to the estimate. If there is no coolant in the system, be sure coolant has been added to the estimate. Note that not all vehicles use the same coolant/antifreeze. In some instances, special coolant may be required by the vehicle maker. It will be necessary to reference OEM service information to identify the correct product to be used -A/C Considerations – if there is damage to an A/C system and the system remains charged, you must include evacuation and recharging the system on the estimate. If the damage to the A/C system caused refrigerant to escape, it will be necessary to re-charge the system with refrigerant and compressor oil as appropriate. Also add this to the estimate. It is also important to remember that A/C systems that have been open may require replacement of the receiver dryer or accumulator as a result of moisture absorber -Steering and Suspension – when replacing steering and suspension components, such as struts, inner and outer tie rods, steering rack, or steering knuckle, it will be necessary to perform a wheel alignment. Some estimating systems may prompt you to add a wheel alignment to your estimate, but in some cases it may require manual selection of a wheel alignment. Note that in many cases, the steering angle sensor (SAS) will require calibration when performing a wheel alignment -Doors and Mirrors – considerations when estimating damage to doors and mirrors include: -Door mirrors may include side view cameras used for several ADAS systems -Doors may contain SRS parts, such as impact sensors and airbags -Note: It is important to remember some ADAS or SRS may require calibration following R&amp;I or R&amp;R of system-related parts. Note that it may be necessary to R&amp;I all interior door trim to access exterior trim parts such as mirrors, handles, lock cylinders, and belt moldings. Add these considerations to the estimate, as needed -Welded Panel Repairs – when replacing a weld-on panel there may be additional repairs required that are not included in base labor allowances. For example, when replacing a rear body panel, it may be necessary to repair “weld zone” damages resulting from normal cutting, welding, and grinding procedures. It is important to reference procedure page (P-page) information for the estimating system you are using to identify included and non-included labor operations -Panel Repair and Corrosion Protection – if a welding process was used, either for panel replacement or panel straightening there will be heat damage to the corrosion protection on the backside of the panel which must be restored to ensure the durability of the repair. Restoration of this corrosion protection is often overlooked but must be addressed with rust preventative products such as cavity wax or other corrosion preventative products -Including Finishes on the Estimate – identifying the finish type is required when preparing an estimate. Begin by determining the paint code, which will indicate if the color is a basecoat/clear coat, multi-stage, or other type of finish. The estimating system will make adjustments to the way the refinish times are calculated based on this information. Once you know the paint code, you can determine additional refinish operations that may be required. Some examples of these may be color-matching or correcting surface conditions such as chips, scratches, or corrosion. It is also important to identify any trim that requires R&amp;I for the refinish process on your estimate -Materials – when writing an estimate, note that the repair and refinish process requires many different materials including: -Surface cleaners, sanding products, tape, and paint -Noise, vibration, and harshness (NVH materials such as foam or sound-deadening material -Seam sealers -Chip-resistant coatings -Note: Charges for refinish materials are typically an automatic calculation done by the estimating system based on the refinish labor and “paint and material” rate. This is established in your estimating system profile. Items such as NVH materials, seam sealers, and chip-resistant coatings are typically not included in the refinish materials calculation. If appropriate, you may need to add them from the parts code table or as manual entries -Hazardous Waste Disposal – another expense typically added to a damage estimate is a hazardous waste disposal or Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) charge. Waste fluids such as paints, solvents, thinner, antifreeze, and oil will typically require hazardous waste disposal. A hazardous waste disposal charge may be a pre-determined figure or calculated when creating the estimate Writing the Estimate -Knowing your Estimating System – when all damage inspections and research have been completed, its time to start the estimate-writing process. As you create the estimate, remember that each time you make an entry, the database is masking additional decisions in the background. This is based on many factors including vehicle identification information, P-page information, and the operations selected. It is also important to have a strong understanding of how your estimating system is designed – “Inside-Out” or “Outside-In”. for example, when replacing a hinge pillar using an inside-out system, the estimating database labor allowance will likely include R&amp;I of the door and hinges. However, when using an outside-in system, the labor allowance for replacing the hinge pillar typically will not include R&amp;I of the door and hinges. This logic may not apply in all cases. So, it is critical to have a strong understanding of the P-pages for the system you are using -Using Line Notes – line notes are used to provide explanations for limiting repairs to a specific area of a panel, prior damage descriptions, any special requests made by the customer, explanations for why automatic entries have been modified, or providing parts vendor information when alternative parts are used. For example, a vehicle maker might provide a sectioning procedure for replacing a quarter panel, but the information provider only lists a full uniside replacement in the database. You, as the estimator, may elect to manually override the labor time to reflect the sectioning operation. In this case, you should enter a line note explaining the change. Be clear so that everyone understands how the repairs are to be completed and the reason for overriding the database-provided labor time. Note: This is not only a courtesy to those reading your estimate. It may also be legal responsibility. Failure to add the repair notes could result in fines or a fraud investigation in some states. -Choosing Replacement Parts – the estimating process also includes making decisions regarding replacement part type. While the primary factor when making these decisions is repair quality, additional factors may include: -Availability -Customer preference -Insurance partner estimating guidelines -State laws -Note: it is important to remember state and local laws take precedence over any shop or insurance company estimating guidelines -Reviewing the Completed Estimate – after you complete the estimate, it is a good practice to compare the completed estimate to the damaged vehicle and parts. This ensures that you capture all damage and include all necessary repair operations in the estimate. It is also good practice to review the completed estimate with the vehicle owner. If appropriate, you may also review the estimate with the insurance company, so all involved parties have a clear understanding of the repair plan -Repair Authorization – before repairs begin, it is necessary to have the vehicle owner sign a repair authorization. This typically gives the shop authorization to begin repairs and reflects an agreement between the parties. This document may also include language about payment and authorizing the insurance company to pay the shop directly for services provided. For drivable vehicles, repair authorization is typically obtained while the vehicle owner is on-site, dropping off the vehicle for repairs. For non-drivable vehicles, waiting for the customer to come into the repair facility and sign the repair authorization form may take time. Some repair facilities have started using electronic signatures such as text messages to obtain repair authorization. This allows the repair process to begin sooner and eliminates waiting for the customer to come to the repair shop to provide authorization for the repair 2022 EQS: Electrifying Luxury LITE X0002E-US.SBA Pre Test Where is the windshield washer fluid flap located? Under the hood – X wrong What is the distinctive, EQS coupe-like side profile design called? One bow What is Intelligent Drive? A suit of active safety systems designed to help reduce the risk of collision What is the all-new electric vehicle platform that the EQS is based on called? HV-1 – X Wrong What is the name of the upgraded infotainment screen(s) in the EQS? MBUX Visual Assist – X Wrong What is recuperation? Where the EQS recovers kinetic energy that would otherwise be wasted as heat Which of the following is a key feature that sets the EQS apart in the EV market? The Mercedes-Bens dealer network, which gives customers peace of mind knowing they will be supported throughout their vehicle ownership experience X0002E-US.SBA PostTest What is recuperation? Where the EQS recovers kinetic energy that would otherwise be wasted as heat Which of the following is a key feature that sets the EQS apart in the EV market? The Mercedes-Benz dealer network, which gives customers peace of mind knowing they will be supported throughout their vehicle ownership experience What is the all-new electric vehicle platform that the EQS is based on called? J-580 – X wrong Where is the windshield washer fluid flap located? In front of the driver’s door What is the name of the upgraded infotainment screen(s) in the EQS? MBUX Hyperscreen What is the distinctive, EQS coupe-like side profile design called? One bow What is Intelligent Drive? A suite of active safety systems designed to help reduce the risk of collision 
